.
#1
    #1()
    
    #1#1==̅ et al. i.e. e.g.#1⟨ #1⟩⟨#|1⟨ #1||#⟩1| #1⟩#1⟨ #1 ⟩ dł l mø o w 11/23/21/32/3-̸4̸p̸t̸-̸2̸p̸t̸e^+e^-sin^2θ_wcos^2θ_wm_zγ_zm_wm_tγ_tm_hg_μg_fα_sm̅ ̅ ̅-̅1̅p̅t̅ ̅s̅λ_e^-_le^+_re^-_re^+_le^-_le^+_le^-_re^+_rϵ#1χ^+_#1#1χ^-_#1#1χ^0_#1#1#1
    .
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    =6.0in  =8.25in
    
    
    =-0.3in   =-0.20in
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    #1
     #1
    a&aa&asapjapjlapssnaturesciencemnraspasp
    
    
    /bdocument/
    
    
    optical interferometry and adaptive optics of bright transients
     florentin millour, olivier chesneau, anthony meilland, nicolas
      nardettomillour, f.
    
    lagrange laboratory, 
    umr7293, université de nice sophia-antipolis, 
    
    cnrs, observatoire de la côte d’azur, bd. de l'observatoire, 06304
    nice, france.
    
    send comments to 
    
    § introduction
    
    
    bright optical transients (i.e. transients typically visible with the
    naked eye) are populated mainly by novæ  eruptions plus a few
    supernovæ  (among which the sn1987a event). indeed, usually one bright
    nova happen every two year, either in the north or the south
    hemisphere (see fig. ). it occurs that current
    interferometers have matching sensitivities, with typically visible or
    infrared limiting magnitudes in the range 5–7. the temporal
    development of the fireball, followed by a dust formation phase or the
    appearance of many coronal lines can be studied with the vlti. the
    detailed geometry of the first phases of novæ  in outburst remains
    virtually unexplored. this paper summarizes the work which has been
    done to date using mainly the very large telescope interferometer.
    
    
    
    we invite the reader to have a look to the extensive review on the
    topic by  for a complete description of the
    science on transients that can be achieved with optical/infrared
    long-baseline interferometers. we give a short summary of the content
    of this paper in the next section.
    
    
    
    § why observing novæ  with optical interferometers?
    
    
    optical interferometers represent a breakthrough in terms of spatial
    resolution, that can provide crucial information related to the nova
    phenomenon. all targets in the 3-5 kpc range can be potentially
    resolved by current interferometers (chara, vlti, npoi).
    
    the vlt interferometer can provide measurements of the angular
    diameters of the nova ejecta in continuum and lines, from the near-ir
    to the mid-ir in the very first moments of the outburst. the primary
    outcome of these observations is a direct estimate of the expansion
    parallax, thus the distance to novæ. of importance is the possibility
    to spatially and spectrally resolve different near-ir emission lines
    to estimate the physical conditions throughout the wind and the
    ejecta. for those objectives, the medium spectral resolution of the
    near-ir instrument amber is an asset. if the nova appears to form dust
    (co novæ ), an in-depth study of the dust forming regions can be
    carried out with the midi instrument. using a set of flexible
    observing runs, we shall follow the outburst from the first days up to
    several months.
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        
    typical frequency of bright novæ  from 1975 to
          2013. about one nova every two years occurs, either in the north
          or south hemisphere[data from
            ,
            complemented by data from
             .
            some peak magnitudes were corrected using aavso data.]. v1663
          aql & v458 vul do not appear in this plot as too faint in v
          (but bright in k). the average rate per year is plotted as a
          dashed line. the arrows show novæ  observed with optical
          interferometers.
    
    
    § nova as a spherical fireball
    
    
    up to now, the program of observations has focused on novæ  with
    magnitudes reachable by the vlti (south declination & k magnitude
    ). past observations and theoretical work on the nova
    phenomenon have provided a substantial knowledge about the physical
    nature of these binary systems and the outburst. however, these
    investigations are naturally limited by the difficulty of estimating
    the distance, which is usually inferred indirectly and with large
    errors. spherical symmetry is a basic tenant adopted in the
    derivation of relationships that link the non-spatially resolved
    photometric and spectroscopic observations to the physical parameters
    of the system <cit.>. spherical symmetry is
    implicitly assumed when the  coverage is not sufficient to perform
    a better analysis. this was the case for the nova v1280 sco
     which was also observed exclusively using
    2 telescope recombination. two years after, observations with the ao
    system naco mounted at the ut4 telescope revealed an impressive dusty
    bipolar nebula <cit.>.
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
        
    2010 naco k band image after a psf subtraction revealing
          the impressive bipolar nebula. mid-ir images also show that
          there is no dust emission in the equatorial plane.
    
    
    § a bipolar fireball from the first blink
    
    
    an interferometer is mainly sensitive to the angular size of a nova in
    its early stages. measuring the size of the fireball in different
    orientations on-sky allows us to infer the axis ratio and orientation
    of an individual nova shell. this is relatively easy to obtain for a
    3–6-telescopes interferometer. this was the case for the outburst of
    the recurrent nova rs oph .
    
    the highly collimated outflow from the rs ophiuchi has been imaged by
    the hst  and in the radio
    . the amber observations showed that the jet
    was already existing 5.5 days after the discovery, and provided a
    unique view of radial-velocities which could afterwards complement the
    expansion rates derived by the hst and radio images
    .
    
    the signature of a bipolar jet in interferometric data is now well
    identified provided that the emission lines are spectrally resolved
    (r1500). the famous nova t pyx exhibited a spherical appearance
    in broadband pionier data, but the signature of a bipolar kinematics
    was clearly detected in our spectrally resolved amber data
    . the numerous peculiarities of the t pyx
    eruptions can be explained in the frame of recurrent nearly face-on
    eruptions that launch fast material in the line-of-sight and slow
    material perpendicular to it, building up the slow expansion shell
    imaged by the hst.
    
    
    
    
    
    
    § intermediate luminosity optical transients
    
    
    intermediate-luminosity optical transients (ilots), are eruptive stars
    with peak luminosity between those of novæ  and supernovæ  that have
    been also called red novæ  or red transient. the powering processes
    and whether they are due to binary interaction or are formed through
    single star evolution are debated. high angular resolution techniques
    can play a role by tracking bipolarity and the formation of
    disks. furthermore, one can also study the remaining central star when
    a merger is highly suspected, for instance by detecting the
    deformation due to very high rotational rate.
    
    
    
     §.§ sakurai's object
    
    
    in 1996, sakurai's object (v4334 sgr) suddenly brightened in the
    center of a faint planetary nebula (pn). this very rare event was
    interpreted as being the reignition of a hot white dwarf that caused a
    rapid evolution back to the cool giant phase. from 1998 on, a copious
    amount of dust has formed continuously, screening out the star that
    remained embedded in this expanding high optical-depth
    envelope. mid-ir interferometry performed in 2008 with the midi/vlti
    instrument discovered a unexpectedly compact (30 × 40 milli-arc-second, 105
    × 140 au assuming a distance of 3.5 kpc), highly inclined, dust disk
    . the major axis of the disk is aligned with
    an asymmetry seen in the old pn. this implies that the mechanism
    responsible for shaping the dust envelope surrounding sakurai's object
    was already at work when the old pn formed, a strong argument for
    binary interaction.
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
     §.§ v 838 mon
    
    
    
    v838 monocerotis erupted in 2002, brightening by 9 magnitudes in a
    series of outbursts, and eventually developing a spectacular light
    echo.  a very red star emerged surrounded by copious amount of new
    dust that condensed from the expanding ejecta of the outbursts. v838
    mon is the close-by archetype of the ilot sources which are triggering
    very active research currently.  midi/vlti observations obtained over
    the last few months showed that the dust resides in the form of a
    flattened structure (15-50 mas from 8 to 13 m), i.e. a
    90x300 au flattened structure for a distance of 6.2 kpc (sparks et
    al. 2008). the modelling of this extended structure is in progress but
    it is incomplete without a much better knowledge of the central source
    which is seen as a very cool m-l type super-giant. amber observations
    were also obtained in 2013 to measure the size of the central source,
    its shape (since it has potential to be a fast rotator) and study the
    cool photosphere / dusty disk transition. the amber data
    
    were essentially acquired with small baselines ( m) and are
    quite noisy (), leading to an angular size of
    3 mas, but with a large uncertainty. we can basically only set an
    upper limit to the diameter of the hk-bands object, of 4.7 mas. this
    would make the hk-bands object smaller than 30 au. this size (and
    shape) difference between the hk-bands and n band is striking and
    reminiscent of super-giant stars dusty disks . further amber observations would enable us to
    pinpoint more precise properties of this intriguing object.
    
    
    
    
    
    
    § conclusion and prospectives
    
    
    we presented here a few results from the vlti campaigns on novæ  and
    ilots. these campaigns present a challenge in terms of scheduling and
    observatory response but provide unique insights on the early
    processes at stake when a nova explode. with the upcoming infrared
    instruments like matisse  or gravity
    , getting a finer idea of the geometry will
    be much faster than with current instruments. the development of
    visible interferometric instruments at the chara array or at the vlti
    would also be an asset to get the sharpest multi-wavelength picture of
    these objects a few days after outburst before the advent of the elt
    in the mid-2030s which will enable direct snapshot pictures of the
    fireball at 10's-milli-arc-seconds resolution for a much larger number
    of novæ.
    
    
    
    aa
    
    
    
    
     
    /edocument/
