.
();a, 
[no \title given]
    [no \author given]
    january 16, 2026
======================
§ introduction
it is widely accepted that the spectral differences between type 1 (sy1) and type 2 (sy2) seyfert active galactic nuclei (agn), can be attributed to an obscuring medium that blocks an observers line of sight (los) to the central engine and broad line region (blr) in sy2s but not in sy1s . the obscurer is generally thought to be a dusty medium in the equatorial direction, such as a thick disk, that obscures the central region when the agn is viewed edge on but not face on. the medium is also thought to be clumpy in order to both explain how a thick disk can be vertically supported  and observed short timescale variations of obscuration in x-rays . the medium then also acts as a material reservoir to fuel the central engine and emission regions . given the tremendous amounts of energy released by the central engine, some of the dusty material could be lifted out of the disk and into a dusty outflow through radiation pressure, opening up a pathway for agn feedback to the host galaxy <cit.>. therefore, understanding this dusty structure is crucial to understanding agn inner dynamics and agn - host galaxy interactions.
first generation long baseline ir interferometry offered a powerful new tool to agn science by resolving the expected spacial scales of the obscuring dusty material at the wavelengths that it thermally emits. it provided strong evidence for polar dust structures, associated to a dusty outflow , in the mid-ir (n-band, m) by midi <cit.> and ring or disk-like structures  in the near-ir (k-band, m) by amber <cit.> and keck . the discovered geometry agreed with, and helped develop upon, our understanding of the dusty material leading to an iteration of the unification scheme that contains an obscuring equatorial dust-gas disk and an outflowing dusty wind .
second generation ir interferometers improved upon the first through increased uv coverage per observation and improved phase information. amber in particular demonstrated the application of closure phases in ir interferometry, a lesson which gravity  and matisse <cit.> have well received. 
whereas first generation instruments such as midi and amber provided model derived geometry for agn, matisse and gravity can allow for image reconstructions <cit.>.
one such object is the sy2 agn, ngc 1068. gravity data of ngc 1068 at m was reconstructed and a ring like structure was found . the structure had multiple interpretations in the work; however, the two favoured geometries were either: the ring is dust near the sublimation radius or the ring is coincidental and consists of clumpy dust on the illuminated back wall of the obscuring disk or inner outflow. alternatively, a radiation transfer (rt) modelling attempt of the gravity data suggested a thin ring perpendicular to the accretion plane , interpreted as possibly a tidal disruption event unrelated to the dust structure of the unification scheme.
used matisse to observe and reconstruct images for ngc 1068 from m and found similar structure to gravity at the shortest wavelengths of matisse. however, the wider wavelength range provided the possibility to extract thermal information from the images derived at different wavelengths. by assuming the matisse and gravity images at each wavelength were aligned by their matching spatial flux distributions and brightest spots, an sed was extracted for different apertures aligned to the observed dust structures, and a two black body and dust obscuration model was fit. the image alignment had the further constraint that the extracted seds must be continuous. this modelling suggested that the dust in the ring feature observed with gravity was too cool (k) to be sublimating (tk). 
the caveat of this interpretation is that the inter-wavelength image position registration was assumed by geometry and sed instead of known. the absolute image position would require absolute phase information which is destroyed by the atmosphere. to know the relative alignment between bands instead would require inter-band differential phases which are not currently available. the uncertainty leaves room for ambiguity over which interpretation is correct. a different registration could give rise to different temperatures and different positions of the dust within the agn.
furthermore,  and  provide multiple alignments between the image reconstructions and the ho maser emission of ngc 1068, most recently published in  who themselves also provide a additional alternate alignments. this makes it difficult to build a clear understanding of the coincidence between the maser and dust emission structures. it is clear that uncertainty in the image positions is a major limitation when studying structures at such high angular resolutions.
it is the aim of this work to provide an interpretation of the ir interferometric data that is free of a "visually based" image alignment though modelling the matisse and gravity data simultaneously with a chromatic model compatible with the unified scheme of agn. specifically, we will design and use the model to:
eginitemize
    
  * attempt to explain the complex ir interferometric data and reconstructed images of the matisse  and gravity  observations,
    
  * determine if the recovered model is compatible with the unification scheme of agn,
    
  * if so, determine if a face on, ring/disk dominated in kl-band, structure (sy1) or edge on wind dominated structure (sy2) is a better fit,
    
  * use the best fit models to produce a model dependent image alignment and black hole location.
the derived geometry will be used 
for a full rt modelling of the dusty structure in ngc 1068 in future work. the model we present will also 
be applied to a larger sample of agn to create a more complete geometric description than was previously possible before second generation vlti instrumentation.
§.§ radiative transfer models with chromatic spatially disperse information
rt models have been used to interpret the seds of agn successfully for many years <cit.>; they are flexible and robust tools for determining model dependent properties of dust in agn. combining the sed fitting process with simultaneous fitting of ir interferometric data has proved to be a very powerful tool with greater constraints on the dust geometry than the sed alone . sed modelling provides zero-order geometric information, the distance and distribution of the dust relative to the central engine can be derived but the absolute positions are ambiguous due to the unresolved nature of the information. by providing resolved information, distinctions can be made between otherwise well fitting models 
<cit.>. 
the results of models like cat3d-wind  when simultaneously reproducing interferometric and sed data as well as the recent work of  demonstrates 
the usefulness of combing spatially resolved observations with chromatic information when modelling dust structures. while sed modelling is well established, only after the first generation of vlti ir interferometers were applied to agn was it possible to do this on milliarcecond scales in the ir where the dust thermally emits <cit.>. with the second generation of instrumentation, it is now possible to apply these techniques to a much wider range of wavelengths and in greater detail due to improved uv coverage per observation and phase information. we take inspiration from the simultaneous rt and interferometric modelling of previous works and create a chromatic model for agn.
in sect.  we give the observations we model. in sect.  we describe in detail how the model is constructed and how we create brightness distributions per wavelengths. in sect.  we detail how we compare our model to the data and determine the best set of parameters to reproduce the data. in sect.  we provide the results of the modelling described previously with some discussion into what each set of results indicate about ngc 1068 alone. in sect.  we discuss the results in the context of the wider literature. in sect.  we discuss the different fitting methods 
and prospects for future work. finally, in sect.  we give our final remarks and summarise the main points of the work.
§ observations
this work makes use of published observations of ngc 1068 made with gravity and matisse on the vlti (priv. comm.)[reduced matisse data can be found at ]. the detailed description of the observations and reduction for the gravity and matisse data can be found in  and , respectively. the raw data can be found on the eso archive under the following ids: matisse programme id: 0103.c-0143, 0104.b-0322 gravity programme id: 0102.b-0667, 0102.c-0205 and 0102.c-0211.
we use the same data as the previous works to remove the possibility of any differences from data handling. the only difference we make is that we do not use the auxiliary telescope (at) data given in  because combining unit telescope (ut) and at data is a non-trivial problem due to the different fovs between the telescopes.
§ model
to interpret the observational data, we create a semi-rt model of agn dust morphology. the morphology we choose is based on the disk+wind interpretation of the unified model <cit.> due to its previous success in reproducing ir interferometric observations of agn such as with cat3d-wind . cat3d-wind is a successful radiative transfer implementation of the disk+wind model. in their work they use cat3d-wind to model the ir sed of many agn including those that cat3d (a clumpy torus model) could not. it has also been used to model midi observations of agn successfully <cit.>. more recently, it was used in one of the interpretations of the gravity data we use in this work <cit.>. outside of cat3d-wind, the geometry has also been used to explain circinus interferometric observations with rt models . furthermore, the disk+wind model is backed up by hydrodynamic and numerical simulations that find a dusty wind can be easily formed from an accreting dust disk around a central engine . ir radiation from the dust disk itself then pushes the wind vertically through radiation to form a hollow hyperbolic cone. therefore, we decide to use this geometry in our model.
§.§ the geometry
we interpret the disk+wind model in terms of two components: a disk with an opening angle and inner radius, and two hyperbolic hollow cones that are perpendicular to the disk. we define our initial geometry 
such that  is perpendicular to the plane of the disk, i.e. the polar axis of the agn, and () are in the disk plane. for convenience, we also define  to be north and  to be east.
we define the disk to have an inner radius () and an opening angle  where  is a free variable (the half-opening angle); the disk opens from the inner radius. in a 2d plane, the surface of the disk can be defined as:
where  and the half opening angle  is defined from the disk plane (). 
schematic of the disk described in equation  and wind defined in equation . we provide the example  and  used to make the wind schematic.
    
we define the wind to be a hyperbolic cone described by:
where  and  are fitted variables that define the hyperbolic cone. these two components are the base geometry of our model. a schematic of the disk and wind can be found in fig. .
§.§ applying clumpiness
we want our structure to be clumpy so for each component we distribute a number of clumps. we define two variables for the number of clumps.  we give as the total number of clumps in the system and  is the  fraction of  that is attributed to the wind. therefore, we can derive the number of clumps in the disk as  n and the number of clumps in the wind as n.
to distribute clumps in the disk, we do so randomly with a probability based on the geometry in equation . the probability in each dimension is:
where  is the normalisation of the truncated gaussian and  is the standard deviation of the dust distribution in the plane of the disk. 
for  we have defined the disk height to be 3 of the normal distribution.
along the wind, we distribute  clouds along the hyperbolic cone in a similar manner to the disk. 
to give the wind a thickness, we randomly offset  for each clump in the wind by a normal distribution with a standard deviation of , which can be a free parameter but is fixed in this work, and centred on . 
the spatial probability distribution for clumps in the wind structure is therefore:
where  is a power law for the distribution of clumps in the wind in the () plane, and  is the outer radius defined as four times larger than the image field of view (fov) of the longest wavelength being modelled.  is arbitrarily large and defined to save computation time by excluding points that fall too far away from the centre to contribute to the total agn ir flux. when computing  from equation  for a clump, each point has an equal probability of being positive or negative to create a biconical outflow. an example schematic can be seen in fig. .
schematic of the disk described in equation  and wind defined in equation  with clumps distributed with the probabilities described in equations  and . we provide the example  and  used to make the wind schematic.
    
we then incline the system towards the viewer (about the x-axis) by  and rotate in the image plane by  (about the y-axis).  is equivalent to the on-sky from north through east position angle (pa) of the polar axis which is the axis perpendicular to the disk. in an aligned system, this is the direction of the jet.
§.§ defining a clump
in the previous section, we described how we distribute clumps in the geometry. here we define what a clump is. we define all clumps as identical spheres of radius  where the only unique properties of an individual clump is the position and temperature.
each clump is given two temperatures, this is because agn are centrally powered. if a clump is optically thick, then the side facing the central engine is directly heated to  while the other side is shielded and therefore at a lower temperature . for the directly heated side of the clump, we set the temperature as a broken power law based on distance from the central engine. we set the power and break separately for each component. for the wind, we set
where ,  is the power before the break,  is the additional power after the break, and  is the break radius in units of . in the disk we set 
 
 
 where  is the power before the break,  is the additional power after the break, and  is the break radius in units of . in this work, we do not fit the sed of ngc 1068 which makes the result insensitive to the absolute temperature; only the relative temperature is required. therefore, we set the power law normalisation  to k at .
the second temperature  is also set separately for the disk an the wind. we define this temperature as a variable constant for each component. for the disk we define the variable as  and for the wind we define it as .
§.§.§ optical depth of a clump
we assume a clump is uniform in density and we can define the optical depth () along the los for a clump as a function of . the equation for the optical depth is 
where  is the wavelength dependent attenuation coefficient of the clump, , and () is the () location of the clump.
 
§.§ defining emission
now we have a clump temperature and optical depth, we can define the emission. when defining emission for a clump, we evaluate per pixel of the image. a pixel has a coordinate  where  and  are  and  scaled by the pixel size in mas. we assume that a clump emits thermally as two black bodies such as  and  where  is planck's law. for , we calculate the total flux from this temperature for a clump as . 
however, we defined this temperature component as the side that faces the central engine and at some viewing angles the clump will self-obscure if optically thick. we approximate this phase angle effect (sometimes referred to as moon phase effect) by applying a factor to the flux of a clump based on its position relative to the centre of the model and the viewer: 
therefore, the flux factor can be defined as . this is the same treatment that is used in some blr cloud models . the effect scales with optical thickness, so we apply a factor of  to , where  is a free variable scaling, which scales the influence of the phase angle effect () with optical thickness. so  can be fully defined as:
for the flux derived from the base temperature, we do not need to apply this phase angle effect. therefore, the total flux contribution from the cooler side is
note that the flux is per steradian. the phase angle effect accounts for the differences in emitting area for the two flux components so they can be additively combined before accounting for surface area. we account for this area when creating the image.
§.§ applying obscuration
when creating an image, we apply two forms of obscuration. the first is from the clumps which we have already defined. a clump from the viewers perspective attenuates the flux behind it by . the second form of obscuration is from a smooth dust structure (the blue solid lines in fig. ).
the smooth dust structure we define as smooth medium only present in the disk of equation  that only acts in obscuration. this obscuration can be applied analytically. for simplicity, we define the obscuration in the plane of the disk such that  are the same as the  in fig.  and , i.e. before the geometry was rotated by  and . we choose the optical depth of the smooth structure to decrease in the  plane and be uniform in  such that
to mimic the  clump distribution in the same structure where  is the attenuation coefficient at  not accounting for . if we rotate the smooth obscuring geometry by applying the rotation matrix
the los from an emitter to the viewer is along  only allowing for a 1d integration. if the los from an emitter enters the disk at  and exits at  then the obscuration from the smooth structure can be defined as
this can be redefined in terms of the error function 
where we use the standard definition of the error function:
in the completely face on case where ,  is ill-defined by the given parameterisation. instead, the limit as  should become the uniform dust case. we do not expect to encounter this blazar-like case so we do not include it.
in reality, we do not make  or  a model parameter, instead we define  and .  and  are the model parameters and are in units of g cm and g cm mas, respectively.  is the optical cross section per mass in cm g of the dusty material used. we use the same dust mix for the clumps and the smooth structure.  and  are density scaling factors.
for the dust we apply in this work, we choose a mix of amorphous carbon and olivine silicates  as was found in  where we allow the relative amount of carbon to olivines be a free parameter  in the same manner as in their sed fitting.   for the two dust species can be seen in fig. . 
§.§ model evaluation specifics
we have fully defined our model geometry and described the characteristics of its emission and absorption. however, there are some important assumptions we make when comparing the model to data. here we discuss how we evaluate the model.
§.§.§ psf effects
there is one final flux scaling factor that we apply when determining fluxes that is due to the telescope psf. the scaling factor is to account for the flux drop from the telescope psf and is approximated by a 2d gaussian on the plane of the sky with a fwhm of  centred on the model centre. this reduces the flux of a point by the distance from the centre. this approximation does not account for the effects from fibre injection in gravity and the pinhole and pupil stops of matisse but it is sufficient for our image sizes. it is noteworthy that we include this factor to ensure any bright points far from the centre are treated properly but the effect is usually negligible due to the psf of a ut. for a telescope diameter of 8 m the fwhm at 2 m is 50 mas which is 1.7 times the fov at the same wavelength.
§.§.§ making an image
before comparing our model to data, we must create an image per wavelength. to make our image we take our defined model, with the analytical smooth obscuration applied, and determine the clump emission and attenuation for all clump occupied pixels in the image. we assume that the obscuration at the centre of a pixel is a good approximation of the average value in the pixel when evaluating the clumps emission and obscuration. for pixels that are only partially filled, we reduce the flux by the fraction of the pixel that is unfilled. to account for changes in pixel size between wavelengths, we normalise the clump flux such that
in the case where . so for any given pixel we get
for pixel  and clump-in-pixel  where  ranges from 1 to the number of clumps in the pixel. furthermore, ,  is the flux of clump  for pixel , and  is the in-clump radius  for clump  at pixel . should a clump fall outside an image, the flux is not included within the image but it is accounted for.
§.§.§ over-resolved structure
when observing extended objects with interferometry, flux can exist outside the largest angular scale the interferometer probes but still within the single dish photometric aperture. we define this as over-resolved structure. 
in agn, this can be from the dust itself or unrelated emission from the host galaxy. instead of images, ir interferometry provides observable quantities that can be used to reconstruct the target source. the two we model are the squared visibility (v) and closure phase (). we compare the model v and , calculated from the model image using the python software package galario, to the observed v and , respectively. any over-resolved flux that falls outside the image does not contribute to  but it does contribute to v as a pa independent scaling factor. v is defined as the squared flux observed by the interferometer divided by the squared flux observed by a single telescope. if you assume all the flux observed by the telescope falls within the image when it does not, your single telescope model flux will be lower than it should be and v will be higher in turn. 
additional scaling to v can arise from instrumental effects causing flux losses in the interferometer. therefore, when modelling a single wavelength or a small band it is common to apply a scaling factor to the model v such that v <cit.>. this achromatic factor has been shown to be a good approximation for a single wavelength. however, it will fail to capture any chromatic over-resolved structure. because our model is chromatic with multiple instruments, applying an appropriate scale factor is not trivial.
to simplify the problem, we make the assumption that the instrumental losses are insignificant or do not change significantly between gravity and matisse; this is a relatively safe assumption because ngc 1068 is bright for an agn and the data for both instruments has been very well reduced by the respective teams. furthermore, the greatest source of losses for agn ir interferometry, particularly at shortest wavelengths, is thought to be the macao ao system . the gravity data was observed under excellent conditions <cit.> and the matisse data was filtered to remove bad ao performance . therefore, the losses from ao should be minimal. for fainter agn this may not be appropriate and will need to be readjusted. therefore, we just account for sources of over-resolved emission. we define our over-resolved structure with the following three components:
over-resolved model flux
some of this over-resolved flux is inherently accounted for in our model. we sum the flux of all clumps that fall outside an image which we use to scale the model v. for computational efficiency, we only apply clump obscuration for clumps inside the image at that wavelength. we assume that clumps that fall outside the image are too sparsely distributed to significantly overlap each other and therefore we can sum just the emission from these clumps after only smooth obscuration. if you sum the flux inside and outside the image, you receive the total flux of the model agn. this is the direct contribution of the model dust to the over-resolved structure, the following components are not necessarily related to our dust structure but still contribute flux in the ir.
a hot component
we find that we do still require an additional factor to explain the shortest and longest wavelengths simultaneously. we apply a hot component to the over-resolved flux. unlike the other two over-resolved components, we only apply this one when performing multi-band fitting.
if we assume the simplest case that the structure responsible for the shortest baseline ( m or  m) v at 2.05 m is the same for the equivalent baseline at 3.29 m then we find v doubles between the two wavelengths (v increases from 0.05 to 0.1 between 2.05 m and 3.29 m, see fig. ). we fit a simplistic model of , where  is a black body of temperature  normalised to 1 at 2m for an under- and over-resolved component;  is the relative flux of the under-resolved component at 2m; and  is an achromatic visibility, to visibilities between 16 m and 20 m from m to m. we find that the change can be explained by k,  k, , and  as seen in fig.  as the red line. the fit tells us that the over-resolved component can be explained by a hot black-body of k responsible for 30% of the flux at m. this does not rule out that the component could be colder with some change in visibility originating from a more complex structure than the unchanging single temperature geometry source assumed in the quick fit.
visibility of ngc 1068 between 16 m and 20 m compared to wavelength in purple. overplotted is a best fit model of an over- and under-resolved black-body model in red.
    
as such, we introduce an over-resolved hot black body of 20000 k to our model when fitting multiple bands. we scale the flux from this black body based on the agn flux such that .  is the shortest wavelength modelled. we fix the temperature because we find it to be otherwise poorly constrained.
there are multiple possibilities for the physical origin of this component. under the assumption that the component is the raleigh-jeans tail of a hot black body, while we cannot constrain the exact temperature, we can conclude that it is too hot to be thermal emission from dust and not a missing component of our agn thermally emitting dust model; i.e. it behaves as a power-law against wavelength with a power of -2 in our covered wavelength range. 
previous work using keck by  finds that 50% of the k-band nuclear (sub 0".1) flux comes from an extended region not attributed to direct heating by the agn but instead scattered nuclear emission.  followed this with k-band speckle interferometry which found an elongated gaussian structure with a lower limit fwhm of  mas responsible for 54% of the nuclear k-band flux with the remaining from a compact nuclear source. the extended component in their work is proposed to be a mix of scattered light from dust in an outflow and thermal emission. such extended scattered light from the accretion disk would be sufficient to explain the over-resolved emission at 2 m. alternatively, star formation could reach sufficient temperatures of  k and  estimate that  of the polarised k-band flux in the central 0".5 arises from stellar contamination.
under the assumption that the component's emission is non-thermal, we find that while a power law with wavelength is just as good a description of the data, the power is completely degenerate with the temperature of the unresolved component with an upper limit on the power of 0. this means the non-thermal radio emission, with a power of  is also a possible contributor . in reality, the over-resolved structure is likely to be from a combination of sources.
in future work, the inclusion of the sed when fitting or further investigation into the central region of ngc 1068 with high angular resolution imaging may provide better constraints on the temperature and physical origin of this component. we note that, because we do not model absolute fluxes, the exact spectral shape of the component beyond being more influential in k- than l-band will have minimal impact on our model result.
an achromatic component
we additionally introduce an achromatic  term. we find we require some scaling at longer wavelengths that is not covered by the hot black body. we apply this scaling as a wavelength independent multiplicative factor to the visibility at all wavelengths. this could be replaced by a second cooler over-resolved black body in future versions of the model. if physical and not instrumental, the origin of this factor could be from an extended larger smooth structure such as the northern component 3 revealed with midi data by . the component from their work is suggested to be a cool 300 k optically thin thermally emitting component but it is also mentioned that it could be a warmer () not heated by the central engine or instead part of the radio emission. the last possibility is not preferred because their component 3 is not well-aligned with radio emission. additionally,  find 475 k dust at 450 mas from the centre from high angular resolution observations with naco. the spectral shape of this component is therefore unclear and the visibility is sufficiently approximated by the simpler achromatic term. with the inclusion of at data or the sed, it may be possible to constrain this component further. this will not have significant impact in this work and can be investigated in more detail in future work.
§.§ defining terms
when performing the modelling, our choice of parameters differs in some cases from our definitions used to describe the model above. here we summarise the parameters we use when modelling and how they relate to the model described above.
optical cross section per gram of the dust materials used in this work as well as a 20% amorphous carbon and 80% olivine mix ().
    
§.§.§ model parameter summary
to summarise, the model has 27 free parameters, 11 of which are geometric parameters and 13 of which relate to the point source fluxes. we also have 1 additional fixed geometric parameter. the parameters, with descriptions, can be found in tab. . 
not included in the table are  and .  is the fractional amount for which the variance is underestimated by the likelihood function if the errors were assumed correct  and is defined separately for closure phase and  as  and , respectively. we define the likelihood for one observable as
§ method
we use the model described in sect.  with the python markov chain monte carlo (mcmc) fitting code emcee . we make use of the galario  and astropy  libraries. while the distribution of points is different, the model fitting process is the same as we used in the point source model of  and . however, we do not penalise the addition of points because, unlike in the previous works, additional points do not require additional parameters.
our model is polychromatic and can be fit to the entire wavelength range of gravity and matisse simultaneously. however, the wider the wavelength range, the more likely we are to encounter complex chromatic structures not covered by our simple model. therefore, we run the model in two different modes, an individual band fit and a full polychromatic fit. we can then compare the results from each to infer the presence of other structures if such structures are present.
because we calculate an image cube of models when fitting to compare with the observables at each wavelength, it is necessary to bin the observational data in the wavelength direction when fitting due to computational resource limitations. however, too large a binning removes the chromatic information contained within a single band. therefore, we decide on the following binning in each band: from 3.2m  3.9m in 4 bins for l-band, 4.6m  4.8m in 2 bins for m-band, and 8.40m  9.0m in 1 bin, 9.40m  11m in 3 bins, and 11.4m  12.7m in 2 bins for n-band. k-band is unbinned due to the rapid change in structure in the band coupled with the low spectral resolution from the fringe tracker data. we do not use the shortest wavelength bin due to the known contamination by the metrology laser  so we have 4 wavelength points in k-band. we use the same binning in both the band-by-band and polychromatic modelling.
§.§ band-by-band
 
at the shortest wavelengths, we are sensitive to the relative position of individual points, i.e. we resolve the non-uniform distribution of dust in the agn. due to the random nature of the point distribution this means we have a dependence on the random seed. we expect this to be particularly influential in the edge-on cases because the inner radius ring-like distribution dominates in the face-on case which becomes smooth at smaller  than the more disperse wind distribution. to evaluate the effect per band, we perform the fit multiple times for different seeds in the band-by-band fit. from this we can determine the specific best fit, the median best fit, and the uncertainty in the model and the parameters introduced by randomness. we also perform the fit twice, once imposing that the central region be obscured () and once imposing an unobscured central region labelled sy2 case and sy1 case, respectively. when we do not impose this, we find that inclination is linearly correlated with wavelength which is potentially unphysical.
we define two sets of boundaries given in table  and fit the model at the wavelength ranges given in sect. . we randomly select a list of unique random seeds and run an mcmc fit for each band for each seed. the initial distribution of walkers is distributed uniformly over the initial range given in table  which are not the same as the boundaries given for the fit. the starting ranges were selected to cover the ranges to which the model is most sensitive, less computationally expensive, or most physically reasonable from hydrodynamic simulations .
model parameters, bounds, and initial values
    
        1cparameter   units   1cdescription   2cbounds   2cinitial   
lower   upper   lower   upper
 
           -   wind temperature power   1e-5   5   0.1   0.8
-   wind temperature additional post break power   0   2   0   1.5
mas   standard deviation of disk dust   1e-6   400   0.1   300
deg   half-opening angle   0   45   5   40
-   hyperbolic shape parameter   1   4   0.1   2
mas   sublimation radius   2   5   3.4   3.6
disk power break radius   1   5   2   4.6
wind power break radius   1   5   2   4.6
-   hyperbolic shape parameter   0.1   4   0.1   2
-   standard deviation for normal distribution about    0.05   -   -   -
(g cm mas)    clump dust density   -7   0   -3.5   -2.5
(g cm )    normalised smooth dust density at    -5.5   -2   -4.5   -2.5
-   disk temperature power   1e-5   5   0.1   5
-   disk temperature additional post break power   1e-5   5   0   1.5
deg   the inclination   0   90   *   *
deg   the pa from north of the polar axis   0   360   5   45
-   percentage of dust that is amorphous carbon   0   1   0   0.3
-   v error underestimation   1e-15   1   1e-10   1e-9
-    error underestimation   1e-15   1   1e-10   1e-9
-   number of points   90   1e5   1e2   2e4
-   log fraction of points in wind   1e-2   1   1e-2   1
-   radial power for distribution of wind clumps   0   3   0   3
-   moon phase effect relative intensity   0.1   1.1   0.5   1.1
mas    clump radius   0   5   0   0.4
flux of hot component at shortest wavelength   0   2   -   -
-   achromatic over-resolved component   0   1   0.4   1.0
k   wind clump base temperature   0   400   0.5   300
k   disk clump base temperature   0   400   0.5   300
        
    
    
        
additional rules
in the l-band. 
we show this in fig. .
opening angle of the initial band-by-band fit in the sy2 case (sect. ) against wavelength.
    
finally, we find that  is consistently lower in k-band which is expected from our initial assumption we would require an over-resolved hot component that is not included in the band-by-band fits. it is consistent with the over-resolved fraction of 0.5 found in  when performing the image reconstruction in k-band.
the presence of the silicate feature makes the n-band observables difficult to reproduce without a wider wavelength coverage. we suspect that this is because much of the n-band is heavily obscured and therefore much of the central geometry is not available; conversely, the wider fov makes more of the extended geometry available. this results in the different seeds providing similar  and geometry for the winds but the disk temperature distribution is unconstrained. 
compared to the other bands,  is high and better constrained in the n-band. this is expected because of the presence of the silicate feature which is a strong constraint on the obscuration. however,  is no better constrained or higher in the n-band than the other bands. this suggests that the smooth obscuration is relatively more impactful at longer wavelengths, possibly due to the lower resolution causing reduced distinction between smooth and clumpy structure. when translating the recovered  and  into  along an equatorial los towards the model centre, we find  is the dominant contribution to the disk obscuration due to the number of clumps in the los. however,  is still significant for some los. particularly if the los is through a region with fewer clumps.
the initial l-, m-, and n-band images produced by the models (see fig. , the n-band is evaluated at 8.5 m) are all quite consistent between seeds and more importantly with the image reconstructions of . the resemblance between the two methods already confirms that the brightness distributions found in  can be reproduced by a disk+wind geometry.
at first glance, the k-band is seemingly less comparable to the image reconstruction of ; although, the image produce by seed s4 is visually similar with a ring-like structure and surrounding clumps. 
we find that the k-band v are dominated by a north-east to south-west binary-like structure with closure phase information introduced by a significantly clumpy structure. this is what is seen in the image of , there is a bright complex north-east component, the ring-like structure, and a dim southern clump. we suggest that because the true brightness distribution is seemingly clumpy and that for a clumpy structure, due to finer angular resolution, the relative positions of the clumps would more important in k-band than in longer wavelengths, it is unlikely that our model, particularly in the initial fit, would find a perfect solution for a particular seed. this is supported by the higher variety of images and parameters in the k-band indicating a higher sensitivity to the seed. therefore, the more likely solution for the model to discover is dominated by the easy to reproduce binary-like structure which is a good description of the v and the  at smaller triangle perimeters (<220m). as such, we often find a bright dense cluster of clumps and a faint cluster, a solution that can be easily reproduced with any seed. this bright-dim spot structure can also be reproduced with a ring similar to the one in . 
§.§.§ sy1 case
the initial run for the sy1 case starts from the same parameters as the sy2 case except that  must be less than . we note that this initial run will not be likely to reproduce case of  because it would require an  of 180 offset from the initial position. this sy1 start is specifically to test the model 3 and model 4 of . the best fits for each seed compared to the data can be seen in fig.  and the images are shown in fig. .
the sy1 case, with the initial parameters given, converged to sy2 like results. the model preferred inclinations that were as close to obscured as allowed or positioned such that the wind acted as the obscurer for the central region. the best fits produced were the same order of magnitude as the sy2 case when comparing likelihood; however, they were consistently of lower likelihood.
§.§.§ rotated sy1 case
to test the ring model of , we perform the same initial modelling as the sy1 case but offset the start of  by 180. it is important to note that   explains the ring as a distinct structure, such as a tidally disrupted clump, separate from the unification scheme. our model can produce a ring that produces a similar brightness distribution but this ring will be the sublimation region, not a distinct structure.
for this case, we recover the ring structure from  in k-band and in l-band. in m-band a ring is still recovered but closer to edge-on and in n-band, we recover the sy2 case. we conclude that the ring fit is a valid solution in k- and l-band individually (see fig. ). however, when we perform a polychromatic fit of all bands begun from the l band ring fit we find that it is not valid for when simultaneously explaining all wavelengths with our geometry. the polychromatic ring fit does not reproduce the observables as well as the sy2 model, particularly in the n-band, as can be seen in figs.  and .
§ technical checks
§.§ dust mass
in our model, we calculate the dust obscuration from clumps and smooth structure. this means we can translate this into a dust density and mass. while this will be inaccurate without the sed, we can check that we do not use unphysical amounts of dust for our best fitting model. in the band-by-band fits,  varies between ; however, within a band the value is significantly more constrained. this is most likely due to the dust composition being poorly constrained by a single band and therefore  becomes semi-degenerate with . in fig.  we show the cross section per gram of the two materials in our dust mix, it can be seen that outside the silicate absorption feature the two materials have differences of up to two orders of magnitude. therefore, for example, in k-band you can achieve the same absorption with pure amorphous carbon and pure olivine dust if you have  times more dust by mass, equivalent to a change in  of 1.65. ergo, for better constraints on a clumps mass we use the result of  (g cm mas) and  mas from the polychromatic model. using a distance to ngc 1068 of 14.4 mpc from the nasa/ipac extragalactic database[the nasa/ipac extragalactic database (ned) is funded by the national aeronautics and space administration and operated by the california institute of technology.] (ned), we can use a conversion from mas to cm of 2.15 cm mas. this leads to the volume of a clump being  cm which gives a mass per clump of  m. this is equivalent to a total dust mass in the disk of  m, including the uncertainties from  and .  measure a gas mass of the molecular torus of  m which would make the disk 0.2% dust. 
for comparison, this is below ism values and, therefore, our model is not requiring an unphysical amount of dust.
§ figures and tables
v and  from the best models in sect.  at one wavelength per band for each seed compared to the observed data.
    
best model for each band (row) and each seed (column) for the final band-by-band fit as determined by the maximum likelihood. the best seed for each band is marked with a red x at the top left corner. the k-,l-,m-,n-bands are evaluated at 2.1 m, 3.5 m, 4.7 m, and 8.5 m, respectively. all images are normalised and given a 0.6 power colour scaling to match that of  for easy comparison.
    
parameters of the best model for each band and each seed (represented by colours as given in legend) for the initial band-by-band fit (coloured circles) and final band-by-band fit (coloured crosses) as determined by the maximum likelihood. the seed used as the starting position for the final fit in each band is given a black border. overplotted as lines are the best and median fit for the polychromatic model. the shaded region is the 1 errors on the median fit parameters.
    
v of the polychromatic model. the colours represent the pa on sky of the telescope pair used for that point. the colour scheme is continuous and cyclical about , due to the fact that a v measurement at pa  and  are equivalent. the line is the best polychromatic model by maximum likelihood evaluated at different pa in  intervals.
    
v of the polychromatic model. the colours represent the pa on sky of the telescope pair used for that point. the colour scheme is continuous and cyclical about , due to the fact that a v measurement at pa  and  are equivalent. the line is the median fit of the polychromatic model with 1 errors as the shaded region evaluated at different pa in  intervals.
    
closure phase of the polychromatic model per wavelength compared to observations. the closure phases for the best fitting model by maximum likelihood were calculated for each of the four telescope triplets at all accessible uv positions for the uts where ngc 1068 has a minimum altitude of 35. the average vector pa is the average of the pa for each of the three baselines in the triplet ensuring the telescopes are in ascending numerical order. e.g. the average pa for u1-u2-u3 is the is average of the pa of the baselines u1-u2, u2-u3, and u1-u3 not u3-u1.  for visual purposes, we have averaged the different bcd positions for the matisse data and reordered the gravity closure phase telescope triplets to match the order of the captions. the changes in closure phase sign from reordering were taken into account.
    
closure phase of the median polychromatic model per wavelength with 1 errors compared to observations. the closure phases were calculated for each of the four telescope triplets at all accessible uv positions for the uts where ngc 1068 has a minimum altitude of 35. the average vector pa is the average of the pa for each of the three baselines in the triplet ensuring the telescopes are in ascending numerical order. e.g. the average pa for u1-u2-u3 is the is average of the pa of the baselines u1-u2, u2-u3, and u1-u3 not u3-u1.  for visual purposes, we have averaged the different bcd positions for the matisse data and reordered the gravity closure phase telescope triplets to match the order of the captions. the changes in closure phase sign from reordering were taken into account. 
    
comparison of the ho maser emission from  to the unconvolved polychromatic model at 2m. the model has a log colour scaling to highlight faint structure. the model centre is aligned with the 5 ghz position of s1 from their work. the velocity is their recession velocity.
    
v and  from the best models from sect.  at one wavelength per band for each seed compared to the observed data.
    
v and  from the best models in sect.  at one wavelength per band for each seed compared to the observed data.
    
best model for each band (row) and each seed (column) for the initial sy1 band-by-band fit as determined by the maximum likelihood. the best seed for each band is marked with a red x at the centre. the k-,l-,m-,n-bands are evaluated at 2.1 m,3.5 m,4.7 m, and 8.5 m, respectively. all images are normalised and given a 0.6 power colour scaling to match that of  for easy comparison.
    
best model for the initial sy1 ring-case band-by-band (top row) and polychromatic (bottom row) fit as determined by the maximum likelihood. all images are normalised and given a 0.6 power colour scaling to match that of  for easy comparison.
    
same as fig. for the ring case of sect.. the line is the median fit of the polychromatic model with 1 errors as the shaded region evaluated at different pa.
    
same as fig. for the ring case of sect.. the closure phases were calculated for each of the four telescope triplets at all accessible uv positions for the uts where ngc 1068 has a minimum altitude of 35. the average vector pa is the average of the pa for each of the three baselines in the triplet ensuring the telescopes are in ascending numerical order. e.g. the average pa for u1-u2-u3 is the is average of the pa of the baselines u1-u2, u2-u3, and u1-u3 not u3-u1.  for visual purposes, we have averaged the different bcd positions for the matisse data and reordered the gravity closure phase telescope triplets to match the order of the captions. the changes in closure phase sign from reordering were taken into account. 
    
/edocument/
.
model results
band   seed                                             
            mas   deg      mas            ()         deg   deg   
all   sp1                                          
k   all                                          
s1                                          
s2                                          
s3                                          
s4                                          
s5                                          
l   all                                          
s1                                          
s2                                          
s3                                          
s4                                          
s5                                          
m   all                                          
s1                                          
s2                                          
s3                                          
s4                                          
s5                                          
n   all                                          
s1                                          
s2                                          
s3                                          
s4                                          
s5                                          
median parameters of the final models with 1 errors. all in band is the polychromatic fit. when the seed is given as all, it is the results from the combined probability distributions of the different seeds.
    
continued - model results
    
        
        band   seed                                          
      3c()                  k   k   mas         
all   sp1                                       
k   all                                       
s1                                       
s2                                       
s3                                       
s4                                       
s5                                       
l   all                                       
s1                                       
s2                                       
s3                                       
s4                                       
s5                                       
m   all                                       
s1                                       
s2                                       
s3                                       
s4                                       
s5                                       
n   all                                       
s1                                       
s2                                       
s3                                       
s4                                       
s5                                       
