.
2212
/bdocument/
shivangi pandey
0000-0002-4684-3404]shivangi pandey
aryabhatta research institute of observational sciences, nainital–263001, uttarakhand, india
department of applied physics/physics, mahatma jyotiba phule rohilkhand university, bareilly–243006, india
[show]shivangipandey@aries.res.in
0000-0002-8377-9667]suvendu rakshit
aryabhatta research institute of observational sciences, nainital–263001, uttarakhand, india
[show]suvenduat@gmail.com
0000-0002-4024-956x]s. muneer
indian institute of astrophysics, bengaluru 560034, india
muneers@iiap.res.in
aryabhatta research institute of observational sciences, nainital–263001, uttarakhand, india
center for basic sciences, pt. ravishankar shukla university, raipur, chhattisgarh–492010, india
jincenjose@gmail.com
aryabhatta research institute of observational sciences, nainital–263001, uttarakhand, india
department of physics, indian institute of technology roorkee, roorkee 247667, uttarakhand, india
1101ashutosh@gmail.com
0000-0001-5841-9179]yan-rong li
institute of high energy physics, chinese academy of sciences, beijing 100049, china
liyanrong@ihep.ac.cn
0000-0001-9449-9268]jian-min wang
institute of high energy physics, chinese academy of sciences, beijing 100049, china
wangjm@ihep.ac.cn
0000-0002-4998-1861]c. s. stalin
indian institute of astrophysics, block ii, koramangala, bangalore–560034, india
cs.stalin@gmail.com
0000-0002-8055-5465]jong-hak woo
department of physics & astronomy, seoul national university, seoul–08826, republic of korea
woo@astro.snu.ac.kr
0000-0003-4759-6051]romain g. petrov
lagrange laboratory, université côte d'azur, cnrs, observatoire de la côte d'azur, nice, france
romain.petrov@unice.fr
0000-0001-6009-1803]james leftley
school of physics and astronomy, university of southampton, southampton so17 1bj, united kingdom
j.leftley@soton.ac.uk
0000-0002-6353-1111]sebastian f. hönig
school of physics and astronomy, university of southampton, southampton so17 1bj, united kingdom
s.hoenig@soton.ac.uk
0000-0001-9957-6349]amit kumar mandal
center for theoretical physics of the polish academy of sciences, al. lotnikw 32/46, 02–668 warsaw, poland
amitastroam@gmail.com
department of applied optics and photonics, university of calcutta, technology campus, jd–2, sector 3, bidhannagar, kolkata –700106 west bengal
aryabhatta research institute of observational sciences, nainital–263001, uttarakhand, india
tushar.g.ubarhande@gmail.com
0000-0002-2052-6400]shu wang
department of physics & astronomy, seoul national university, seoul–08826, republic of korea
wangshu100002@gmail.com
0000-0002-1207-0909]michael brotherton
department of physics and astronomy, university of wyoming, laramie, wy 82071, usa
mbrother@uwyo.edu
department of applied physics/physics, mahatma jyotiba phule rohilkhand university, bareilly–243006, india
archana.gupta@mjpru.ac.in
robust extragalactic distance measurements are crucial for resolving the persistent discrepancy in the value of the hubble constant (). active galactic nuclei (agns), through their compact and variable broad-line regions (blrs), enable the determination of geometric distances when reverberation mapping (rm) is combined with spectroastrometry(sa). we report results from a spectroscopic rm campaign (october 2022 to march 2023) targeting two narrow-line seyfert 1 galaxies, mrk 1048 and mrk 618, using 3.6-m dot and 2-m hct. high-cadence spectro-photometric monitoring was carried out using onboard instruments such as adfosc, hfosc, and tanspec, resulting in well-sampled continuum and emission line light curves. the observed fractional variability () ranged from 4% to 14% across the -band, h, and h light curves. the time lags were measured using the interpolated cross-correlation function (iccf), pyiccf, and javelin methods. in the rest frame, the iccf analysis yields h lags of  days for mrk 1048 and  days for mrk 618, while the corresponding h lags are  and  days, respectively. the emission-line widths, measured from the rms spectra using , give virial black hole mass estimates of  for mrk 1048 and  for mrk 618. these results will serve as a basis for absolute geometric distance calibration when combined with vlti/gravity spectro-astrometric measurements, thereby contributing to the development of agns as standardizable cosmological probes.
§ introduction
 
active galactic nuclei (agns) are among the most luminous and enduring objects in the universe, powered by accretion onto supermassive black holes (smbhs)  with masses exceeding  . their characteristic broad emission lines and strong continuum variability have long served as vital probes of the central regions of agns. a particularly promising geometric approach to studying the broad-line region (blr) structure  and measuring agn distances is the combined use of spectroastrometry and reverberation mapping (sarm) that was first introduced in . spectroastrometry (sa) enables sub-diffraction-limit angular measurements by tracing wavelength-dependent photocenter displacements , while reverberation mapping (rm) provides radial blr sizes based on the time delay between variations in the ionizing continuum and the corresponding response in emission lines. together, these techniques enable not only to constrain the geometry and kinematics and measure the black hole masses, but also to estimate the geometric distance independent of the traditional cosmic distance ladder. applications to a few objects yielded  values consistent with standard cosmology . further theoretical refinements, including modeling of blr emissivity and responsivity, have improved the accuracy to within 10–30% , although the precision remains constrained by current interferometric capabilities.
rm , which is a traditional method for studying the central engine of agns, uses the time delay between variations in the ionizing continuum (from the accretion disk) and the broad emission lines (from the blr) to measure the size of the blr. assuming the blr gas is virialized, the smbh mass can be calculated using the virial equation:
where  is the blr radius (from time lag),  is the line width (fwhm or ), and  is the virial factor inferred from blr geometry and inclination. rm has been applied to over a hundred agns, successfully calibrating the  relation , and yielding insights into black hole mass scaling relations, agn structure, and accretion physics <cit.>. the velocity-resolved delay map and dynamical modelling of rm data showed evidence for keplerian rotation of the blr clouds and a disc-like blr in many agns <cit.>. however, these are limited by the requirements of better and higher cadence data.
despite its success, rm is fundamentally limited by its inability to resolve full spatial structures, as it probes only line-of-sight velocities. this constraint has been significantly alleviated by advances in optical/ir interferometry. in particular, the gravity instrument on the vlti has spatially resolved blrs in nearby agns with 10 as precision, observing sources like 3c 273 and ngc 3783 . gravity has also revealed a strong correlation between hot dust sizes and rm-based blr radii, offering an alternative path for smbh mass estimation with fewer observational demands . combined with rm, this enables a complementary spatial–temporal view of blr geometry. 
to fully exploit sarm for distance measurements and smbh mass estimation, high-quality rm data remains essential. while gravity/vlti provides angular sizes for nearby agns, accurate blr linear sizes from rm are needed to derive angular diameter distances. this requires long-term, high-cadence spectroscopy of agns with strong, variable broad lines. motivated by this, we initiated an rm campaign targeting agns observable with gravity/vlti, aiming to measure time lags between the ionizing continuum and broad-line variations. these lags yield estimates of the blr radii and virial mass for future sarm studies. this paper presents the campaign’s initial results, variability analysis, lag measurements, and black hole mass estimates. section  details the target selection and observations; section  describes data processing and light curve analysis; section  presents lag measurements via iccf and javelin; section  covers mass estimation methods; section  offers comparisons and implications; and section  summarizes our findings.
§ target selection and observations
to assemble a sample suitable for sarm observations from both hemispheres, we began with the catalog of , which lists 30 low-redshift agns () with  and expected blr angular sizes 20as. these characteristics make them promising candidates for distance measurements using strong brackett  or paschen  emission lines accessible to gravity. among these 30 agns, only seven have declinations higher than  and -band magnitudes brighter than 11, rendering them accessible to ground-based observatories in both hemispheres. initially, we planned to monitor all seven sources using the 3.6-m devasthal optical telescope <cit.>, aries, nainital and 2-m himalayan chandra telescope (hct) at the indian astronomical observatory (iao), hanle, india, as part of this campaign. over 5-6 months, i.e., october 2022 to march 2023, four agns were successfully observed. however, data quality was affected by external factors such as seasonal gaps, weather conditions, variability constraints, and cadence issues. ultimately, only two out of four sources, mrk 1048 and mrk 618, exhibited well-sampled light curves with better cadence spectroscopic monitoring and strong correlation properties. the table  depicts the different properties for mrk 1048 and mrk 618, including redshift, luminosity distance, magnitude in -band, corrected for extinction value, total number of epochs of spectro-photometric observation, the cadence in both, the period of observations, and telescopes.
observational details of mrk 1048 and mrk 618
    
        name                    2c     2c     2cmjd     telescopes 
(mpc)     (mag)    spec     phot     spec     phot     spec     phot     
(1)     (2)     (3)     (4)     (5)     (6)     (7)     (8)     (9)     (10)     (11) 
mrk 1048     0.0426     191.4     14.02     25     125     7     1-3     59856.79-59998.81     59796.33-60001.07      dot, hct 
mrk 618      0.0355     154.9     14.10     25     211     7     1-3     59856.87-60014.81     59796.27-60030.60     dot, hct 
note: column (1): object name. column (2): redshift from nasa/ipac extragalactic database (ned). column (3): luminosity distance derived from redshift. column (4): -band magnitude. columns (5)–(6): number of observation epochs (spectroscopic and photometric, including ztf and asas-sn). columns (7)–(8): median sampling interval (spectroscopic and photometric). columns (9)–(10): duration of observations (spectroscopic and photometric). column (11): telescopes used.
weekly cadence spectroscopic and photometric observations of both sources were carried out using optical and near-infrared (nir) spectrographs mounted on the 3.6-m dot and the 2-m hct. optical spectro-photometric data with dot were obtained using the aries devasthal faint object spectrograph and camera (adfosc) . adfosc features a 4k4k deep-depletion ccd camera, yielding a pixel scale of 0.2/pixel with 22 binning . however, due to technical reasons (limited ports to mount the instrument at dot), the optical spectrograph adfosc, which covers both the h and h lines, is available for 2 months in each observation cycle. therefore, we have also used the tifr-aries near infrared spectrometer (tanspec)  (mounted at dot alternatively with adfosc), which covers the optical h line (m) along with other infrared emission lines. tanspec is equipped with two teledyne hgcdte astronomical wide area infrared imager (hawaii) detectors: an h1rg (10241024 pixels) for imaging and slit viewing, and an h2rg (20482048 pixels) for spectroscopy. the instrument offers a 11 arcmin field of view and covers a wavelength range of 0.55–2.5 m, split into 10 spectral orders.
optical observations with the hct utilized the himalayan faint object spectrograph camera (hfosc)[], a versatile instrument designed for low- and medium-resolution grism spectroscopy. the detector comprises a site st-002 2k4k pixel ccd, with the central 2k2k region used for imaging. this setup provides a field of view (fov) of approximately 1010 and a pixel scale of 0.296/pixel.
-band image of mrk 1048 and mrk 618 observed from the hfosc/hct with a field of view of 1010. the sources are marked, and the nearby comparison stars are shown.
§.§ photometry
 
photometric observations were conducted using broadband filters, specifically the sdss -band (623 nm) from adfosc, the -band (550 nm) from hfosc and the -band (612 nm) from tanspec. for each target, three broadband photometric frames were acquired with exposure times ranging from 30 to 60 seconds, immediately preceding the spectroscopic observations. fig.  presents the -band images of mrk 1048 and mrk 618, with the central agn marked. images obtained from each observation night were initially aligned using the astroalign python package . the pre-processing of photometric frames followed standard procedures, including bias subtraction, flat-field correction, and cosmic ray removal. aperture photometry was carried out using sep, a python-based wrapper for the source extractor package . differential photometry was performed by selecting 3–5 nearby reference stars, as shown in fig. . the photometric aperture was set to 2.5 times the average full width at half maximum (fwhm) of the selected comparison stars, where the fwhm was determined by fitting a gaussian profile to the data. the local sky background was estimated within an annular region extending from 4 to 5 times the fwhm. the differential magnitude of the source was then calculated relative to the comparison stars in the same field of view. finally, a photometric zero point was applied to convert instrumental magnitudes into calibrated broadband magnitudes.
in addition to our observations, we incorporated archival -band photometric data from two public time-domain surveys: the all-sky automated survey for supernovae (asas-sn)  and the zwicky transient facility (ztf) . to ensure photometric quality, we selected only high-quality measurements by applying a flag condition of bad catflags ask , which excludes data points marked with any known issues such as saturation, blending, or poor centroiding. this effectively removes outliers and spurious detections from the ztf light curves. these datasets span the period from may 2022 to march 2023. given the higher cadence of the asas-sn -band data (centered at 4747å), we intercalibrated all photometric measurements from other bands to the asas-sn scale using the pycali software . this intercalibration significantly enhanced the temporal sampling of the light curves, as summarised in table . for the subsequent analysis, we adopt the intercalibrated -band light curve as the primary continuum-driving signal.
§.§ spectroscopy
 
spectroscopic observations were conducted using three instruments: adfosc and tanspec onboard the 3.6-m dot, and hfosc onboard the 2-m hct, each configured to obtain high-quality spectral data. below, we detail the setup and reduction procedures used for each instrument.
1) adfosc (mounted at 3.6-m dot) spectroscopic observations were performed using a 1.2-wide and 8-long slit in combination with a 132r-600 gr/mm grism, covering the wavelength range 3500–7000 å, and centered at 4880å. each spectroscopic frame had an exposure time of 600 seconds. bias and flat-field frames were also acquired throughout the night for standard calibration. seeing conditions during the observations ranged between 0.5 and 1.5. the instrumental resolution was determined to be 7å (corresponding to 312 km s), measured by modeling the emission lines in a combined hg-ar-ne arc lamp frame taken with the same configuration as the science exposures.
2) hfosc (mounted at 2-m hct) spectroscopic data were obtained using grism 7, which provides a spectral resolution of  and covers a wavelength range of 3800–6840å. observations employed a 1.15-wide and 11-long slit. wavelength calibration was carried out using fe-ar and fe-ne hollow cathode lamps, taken immediately before and after the science frames. the observations were conducted under good photometric conditions, with an average full width at half maximum (fwhm) seeing of approximately 1.6. bias and flat-field calibration frames were collected at the beginning and end of each night. the resulting spectral resolution achieved was 8å.
spectroscopic data reduction was performed using iraf , following standard procedures including bias subtraction, flat-fielding, and cosmic ray removal using the l.a. cosmic algorithm . flat-field correction was applied using a tungsten-led lamp for adfosc and a halogen lamp for hfosc, with both lamps normalized before division by the science frames. spectral extraction was carried out using the 'apall' task in iraf, with an aperture size of 7–8 set for both the target source and comparison stars. wavelength calibration for adfosc spectra was performed using hg-ar and neon arc lamps, whereas fe-ar and fe-ne lamps were used for hfosc data. all calibration lamps were observed in the same instrumental configuration as the respective science exposures. for adfosc, the calibration lamp frames were combined using the 'imcombine' task in iraf. the resulting combined calibration spectrum was then used to derive the wavelength solution, which was subsequently applied to both the science and reference star spectra. flux calibration was achieved using a spectrophotometric standard star, from which a sensitivity function was derived and applied. fig.  displays the mean spectrum obtained from all adfosc observations, with prominent emission line regions indicated. the upper and lower left panels correspond to mrk 1048 and mrk 618, respectively.
3)the tanspec (mounted at 3.6-m dot) spectrograph has two operational modes, capturing spectral data on a 2k  2k h2rg array. we have carried out spectroscopic observations in the cross-dispersed (xd) mode, which uses a combination of a grating and two prisms that are employed to pack all spectral orders onto the h2rg detector, achieving a resolution of  for a 1 slit width. standard observational procedures were followed: each target was nodded along the slit at two positions, with multiple exposures taken at each nod to enhance the signal-to-noise ratio (snr). exposure times were limited to three minutes per frame to facilitate effective cancellation of telluric emission lines through frame differencing at alternating nod positions. telluric correction was performed using a nearby a0v-type standard star. additionally, argon and neon arc lamps were used for wavelength calibration, and tungsten lamps were employed for flat-fielding. calibration frames were acquired for each target to ensure accurate and precise spectral calibration. data reduction was carried out using the  pipeline [], a dedicated tool designed for reducing tanspec cross-dispersed (xd) mode spectra. the extracted spectra were corrected for telluric absorption features and subsequently normalized. continuum-normalized spectra from different spectral orders were combined to construct a final composite spectrum for each source. flux calibration of the tanspec spectra was performed using a telluric standard star and photometric observations taken around the same time, and the spectral slope was adjusted based on data from the hct or adfosc instrument on dot. a nearby epoch spectrum from hct or dot was used to measure the slope of the source continuum, which was then applied to the wavelength-calibrated tanspec spectrum. after this correction, the spectrum was rescaled to match the corresponding photometric flux, ensuring consistency between the spectral and photometric data. fig.  shows the composite mean spectra of mrk 1048 and mrk 618 in the upper and lower right panels, respectively. the h emission line and several paschen series lines are prominently visible. however, in fig.  only a small portion of the spectrum is visible to highlight the h emission line. the spectra are comparatively noisier due to residual telluric features and gaps in atmospheric transmission. 
the composite spectra from adfosc (left) and tanspec (right) of mrk 1048 (top) and mrk 618 (bottom) are shown. the emission line regions, such as h and h, h, with narrow emission lines [o3] are highlighted.
    
§ analysis
§.§ spectral decomposition
accurate rm measurements require precise estimation of the intrinsic variability of agn, necessitating correction for extrinsic factors such as changes in observing conditions. failure to account for such effects can result in the misattribution of variability to intrinsic agn emission. to mitigate this, we employed the mapspec python package[] , which implements a bayesian framework based on the method of . it applies an empirical template to correct time-series spectra for variations in wavelength calibration, attenuation, and spectral resolution. for spectral calibration, the [o3]5007 emission line was used as a non-variable reference feature to rescale spectra and correct for redshift shifts at each epoch for both sources. the [o3] extraction windows were defined as [4984, 5025]å for mrk 1048 and [4990, 5027]å for mrk 618, to account for source-specific linewidth differences. the adjacent continuum windows were set as [4980, 4990]å and [5027, 5037]å for mrk 1048, and [4974, 4984]å and [5025, 5035]å for mrk 618.
the mapspec package standardized the [o3] profiles across all epochs by correcting for wavelength shifts, flux scaling, and line broadening using a gauss-hermite kernel . the reference epoch was selected based on the spectrum exhibiting the broadest [o3] profile and using hct spectral [o3] flux having a large number of data points comparatively, typically corresponding to data acquired under poor seeing conditions or affected by slit losses. calibration uncertainties were measured using a markov chain monte carlo (mcmc) approach. the resulting flux scaling uncertainties were combined in quadrature with the measurement errors of the h flux, ensuring accurate propagation of calibration errors into the final light curve.
l-r: the h and h emission line plots are shown along with their residual after fitting for mrk 1048. the broad component fitting with a double gaussian is in green, whereas the narrow component fitting is shown in orange. the total line model is overplotted on the original continuum-subtracted spectrum. the h emission line fiting have decomposed the [n2]6549, and [n2]6585 and narrow h component.
    
the publicly available multi-component spectral fitting code pyqsofit, developed by  and , was employed for spectral decomposition and line fitting. a comprehensive description of the code and its applications can be found in , , and . each agn spectrum was first corrected for galactic extinction using the reddening map of  and the milky way extinction law of , adopting . the spectra were then de-redshifted using the redshifts listed in table . the underlying continuum was modeled with a power-law fit over selected line-free regions of the spectrum, specifically: [4200, 4260], [4435, 4640], [5100, 5535], [6005, 6035], and [6110, 6250]å. additionally, feii emission was modeled using templates from . the signal-to-noise ratio (s/n) in continuum regions around 5100å was typically in the range of 20–30 for both sources. following continuum subtraction, detailed multi-gaussian modeling was performed in the h and h regions, as illustrated in fig. . the narrow components of h, [o3]5007, [o3]4959, h, [n2]6549, and [n2]6585 were each modeled using a single gaussian, with their velocities and velocity offsets tied together to ensure consistency. the broad components of h and h were modeled using two gaussians to account for the peak and extended wings. the best-fitting models were determined through  minimization. from the resulting models, we extracted emission line fluxes and line widths. the continuum luminosities at 5100å, measured within a 40å window centered on the line 5100å (20å on either side).
variability statistics.
    
    
    
    
        source     parameter     -band     h     h 
(1)   (2)   (3)   (4)   (5)
mrk 1048                      
median              
mrk 618                    
median               
note: variability statistics (), the maximum-to-minimum flux ratio (), and median values with their respective errors for -band, h, and h in mrk 1048 and mrk 618. the median flux for the -band is in magnitude, for h and h emission lines, it is in  erg s cm å.
    
for tanspec spectra, the continuum was modeled using a power-law fit over selected line-free regions: [6502, 6645], [10736, 11005], [12700, 13000], [14765, 15755], and [19017, 19524]å. after subtracting the fitted continuum, spectral decomposition was performed in the h region, using a single-gaussian profile fit within the wavelength range 6400–6670å. the integrated flux of the h line was then calculated by integrating the best-fitting gaussian model.
§.§ light curve and variability
for data obtained from adfosc and hfosc, the emission line fluxes for h and h were measured by integrating the area under the broad components modeled using best-fitting gaussians from pyqsofit, centered at 4861å and 6564å. the rest-frame wavelength ranges used for integration were [4780, 4940]å for h and [6450, 6680]å for h, with these regions consistently applied to both sources. however, the line widths and flux strengths differed significantly between mrk 1048 and mrk 618, reflecting source-specific kinematics and variability. in addition to the h fluxes derived from tanspec (using single-gaussian fitting), we employed pycali once again to intercalibrate the h light curves obtained with adfosc and hfosc against those from tanspec. this step was essential to correct for noticeable flux offsets present in the tanspec spectra. however, since the tanspec dataset contains only a limited number of observations (5-6 data points), the use of pycali introduces relatively larger uncertainties, which in turn affect the final flux calibration. to mitigate this issue, we smoothed the h light curve by applying a five-point running average. the final intercalibrated h and h emission line light curves were then used for lag measurements for the photometric -band continuum light curve. understanding short-term intrinsic variability is crucial for determining accurate lags. the final light curves are shown in fig. . the upper panel displays the -band photometric continuum, with marked data points from different telescopes. the middle panel presents the h emission line light curve from adfosc and hfosc observations, while the bottom panel shows the intercalibrated h emission line light curve, including data points from tanspec. for mrk 618, we have added the h flux points from season 4 of  in our obtained h light curve for better cadence and correlation analysis.
typical light curve parameters, including the fractional variability amplitude (), the maximum-to-minimum flux ratio (), and the median flux, are summarized in table . the fractional variability amplitude was calculated using the following equation :
where  is the variance of the light curve,  is the mean square measurement uncertainty, and  is the mean flux.
mrk 1048: the properties of the light curves for mrk 1048 are listed in the first three rows of table . the  for the photometric -band continuum is approximately 7.30%. the variability amplitudes for the h and h emission lines are higher, at 10.3% and 6.75%, respectively. as expected, the median flux of the h line exceeds that of h, reflecting the intrinsic line strength differences between them . the typical h/h flux ratio is around 3, and our results are broadly consistent with this value. median flux values are reported in magnitudes for the -band and in units of 10 ergscmåfor the emission lines. the maximum-to-minimum flux ratios () are 1.42, 1.50, and 1.27 for the -band, h, and h, respectively.
mrk 618: the light curve parameters for mrk 618 are presented in the last three rows of table . the -band continuum exhibits a relatively lower  of approximately 4.20%. the emission lines show moderately higher variability, with  values of 7.68% for h and 13.91% for h. the greater scatter may partly influence the higher variability amplitude observed for h in the tanspec data points and host galaxy dilution. corresponding  and median flux values are also listed. as evident from fig. , the emission line light curves for mrk 618 also show more pronounced variability than the photometric continuum. additionally, the h line strength is 3 times more prominent than h, similar to mrk 1048 median flux.
§ time lag measurement
§.§ iccf and javelin
to measure the time between the continuum variations and the h and h emission line responses, we employed two widely adopted techniques: the interpolated cross-correlation function (iccf)[]  and the model-based code javelin[] . both methods have been extensively validated in the context of rm studies <cit.>, and typically produce broadly consistent results . the iccf approach involves computing the cross-correlation function between the continuum and emission line light curves to identify the degree of correlation and the corresponding time lag. we explored a lag search range from –20 to +100 days, guided by previously reported lags for both sources (typically within 30 days; ) and our total monitoring baseline. following the approach discussed by , where it is emphasized that too wide a lag window may introduce spurious secondary peaks or dilute the correlation strength due to noise and sparse sampling, we tested narrower windows around the expected lag range. we found that the posterior lag distributions consistently peaked at the same locations, though with slightly lower correlation coefficients () when using wider windows. when we refined the lag search window to -10 to +50 days for mrk 1048 and mrk 618, the primary iccf peak remained prominent and  increased, suggesting improved sensitivity and reduced contamination from false correlations. moreover, we do not have to deal with seasonal gaps as our monitoring period is roughly 5 months. to account for irregular time sampling, the iccf method interpolates one light curve while holding the other fixed. then, it averages the results of both configurations to construct the final cross-correlation function.
we used the flux randomization/random subset sampling (fr/rss) monte carlo technique  to quantify the uncertainty in lag measurements. this involves generating multiple realizations of the light curves by resampling and perturbing the data and computing the centroid lag () from the portion of the ccf above 80% of the peak r, also highlighted in fig. . the median of the resulting  distribution is adopted as the best-measure lag. the derived lag values for both methods are summarised in table .
javelin, developed by , models agn continuum variability using a damped random walk <cit.> process and derives emission line light curves by convolving the modeled continuum with a transfer function, typically a top-hat function. uncertainties on the lag and other parameters are measured using a markov chain monte carlo (mcmc) approach, which provides statistical confidence intervals for the best-fit values. javelin simultaneously models both continuum and emission line light curves. the drw model has been shown to reproduce agn variability on both short and long timescales across multiple bands, with some exceptions <cit.>. compared to iccf, javelin often produces tighter constraints on lag measures <cit.>. table  presents the lag results.
measured time delays (lags) for mrk 1048 and mrk 618 using iccf, javelin, and pyiccf methods.
2*source     2*light curve    
2ciccf    
1cjavelin    
2cpyiccf 
(lr)3-4(lr)5-5(lr)6-7
        lag (days)          lag (days)      lag (days)      p-value
(1)     (2)     (3)     (4)     (5)     (6)     (7) 
2*mrk 1048
      -band vs h          0.9                0.09 
-band vs h         0.7                0.16 
2*mrk 618
      -band vs h          0.7                0.06 
-band vs h         0.8                0.04 
[flushleft]
* note. lags are in the observer frame for g-band vs h and h emission line light curves. columns: (1) source; (2) light-curve chosen to calculate the lag; (3) iccf centroid lag; (4) cross-correlation coefficient ; (5) javelin lag; (6) pyiccf lag; (7) pyiccf null hypothesis value (p). the lag search range for both sources, mrk 1048 and mrk 618, is between -10 to 50 days.
light curve plots for mrk 1048 and mrk 618. the upper panel shows a photometric -band continuum with labelled data points from each telescope. the middle left and lower left panels display h and h emission line fluxes in arbitrary units, with -band continuum overlaid. these are mean-subtracted light curves and are matched by normalizing the -band continuum light curve and shifting the emission line light curves to the final adopted lag values mentioned in table . the javelin modelling for each light curve is shown in steel blue. for the h light curve, we have smoothed it with five consecutive points using the running average method. the right upper and lower panels show the lag histograms from iccf (teal) and javelin (violet). these plots display the ccf  value on the left (pink) and the probability density(n) of the histograms on the right. the darker pink region of the  curve depicts 80% of the centroid peak that is used to calculate the final iccf lag. the dashed lines indicate the lags with 16th and 84th percentiles of the lag probability density.
mrk 1048: the iccf analysis yields a lag of  days with a well-defined peak and a maximum cross-correlation coefficient () of 0.88, whereas javelin yields  days between the -band and h, being consistent within the errors. for the -band vs. h, both iccf and javelin give lag values of  and  days, respectively, with  for the iccf. the h lags were comparatively shorter than the h lag values from each method, hinting at the blr stratification . the lag distributions are visualised in fig.  (right panels). for -band vs. h, the iccf and javelin lag distributions are confined within 0 to 25 days with a very sharp peak near measured lag values. in contrast, for -band vs. h, javelin posterior distribution is narrower than the iccf lag distribution with three sharp peaks, which is widely spread till 25 days. the lag results for h are broadly consistent with those reported by  as part of the lamp 2016 campaign, where a rest-frame lag of  days was measured with a  shaped more likely as a flat top. our monitoring over a longer duration yields a more sharply defined lag with a higher , improving upon the earlier constraints.
mrk 618: the lag measurement from iccf and javelin measures of  and  days, respectively, with a maximum correlation coefficient () of approximately 0.72, as reported in table . the measured lag for the -band vs. h light curves is consistent and similar to h within error, with  days (=0.81) obtained via iccf and   days via javelin. the lag distributions for these pairs, shown in the upper and lower right panels of the second row in fig. , reveal stronger confined peaks for h and h. uncertainties for both methods were derived from the entire probability of the lag distributions. the lag results are very similar to those reported by <cit.>. they provided a range of lag values obtained over four seasons, and our results for h are in agreement with its lag value measured in the fourth season.
§.§ simulations
to assess the robustness of our measured lags and determine whether the observed time sampling is adequate for reliable lag detection, we performed extensive light curve simulations. for each source (mrk 1048 and mrk 618), we generated mock continuum light curves based on the damped random walk (drw) model, with parameters tuned to match the variability amplitude and timescale of the observed -band continuum. importantly, the simulated light curves were constructed with the same temporal sampling and data gaps as the real observations, thereby preserving realistic observational conditions. the emission line light curves for h and h were then synthesized by shifting, smoothing, and scaling the mock continuum light curves using the observed lag values derived from our iccf analysis (see table ). we applied both iccf and javelin time-series analysis methods to each realization in order to recover the input lag. this process was repeated for 1000 independent simulations for each emission line and each source. 
fig.  shows the distribution of recovered-to-input lag ratios from the iccf simulations. the distributions are strongly centred around unity, confirming that the input lags can be accurately recovered under the actual cadence and noise conditions. these results validate the significance and reliability of our measured lags for both h and h in mrk 1048 and mrk 618.
we simulated light curves for the -band continuum and the h and h emission lines with 1000 independent realizations each. the figure shows the probability distribution of the ratio between the recovered lag and the input iccf lag (11 days) for the mrk 1048 -band versus h case with the iccf method. the quoted median of the distribution is close to unity, indicating that the observed sampling and noise levels are sufficient to recover the intrinsic lag reliably.
    
we have also employed the publicly available pyiccf code[], developed by  and based on the method described in . this approach evaluates the statistical significance of the lag measurements and provides an independent check on the reliability of the iccf method. the method is grounded on the null hypothesis that, when two uncorrelated random light curves are cross-correlated, the maximum correlation coefficient () should be greater than or equal to the observed value  obtained from the actual light curves. to test this, the code generates a large ensemble of mock light curves from a damped random walk (drw) model with the same noise properties and cadence as the observed data <cit.>. in this work, we generated 5000 mock realizations of the continuum, h, and h light curves. the resulting lag measurements and their significance are summarized in table . alongside the iccf and javelin results, the pyiccf lag values and the corresponding null-hypothesis -values are reported. following the reliability criteria   and , we confirm that all lag measurements listed in table  are robust. notably,  values remain in the range –, further supporting the reliability of the iccf results.
§ effect of detrending
in our analysis, a linear trend is apparent in the light curves of mrk 1048, while it is less pronounced in mrk 618. to account for this, we applied a linear detrending procedure by fitting a straight line to both the continuum and emission-line light curves and subtracting the best-fit model from the original data. this approach isolates short-term intrinsic variability while minimizing the impact of long-term drifts <cit.>, without introducing artificial fluctuations that could arise from higher-order polynomial fits. the detrended light curves and corresponding lag measurements are shown in fig. . time lags were re-estimated using both iccf and javelin, and the results are summarized in table . the posterior lag distributions displayed in fig.  exhibit broader spreads or multiple peaks in some cases, reflecting weaker correlations. consistently, the maximum cross-correlation coefficients () decrease across all cases—dropping to  for mrk 1048 and below 0.3 for mrk 618. to further evaluate the statistical significance of these lags, we employed pyiccf, with the corresponding null-hypothesis -values listed in table . for mrk 1048, the -values exceed 0.25, while for mrk 618 they are even higher (up to 0.72 for the -band vs. h correlation), indicating that detrending substantially reduces the apparent lag significance. the detrended results are discussed in sec. ; however, due to their lower significance, these lags were not adopted as our final measurements.
§ black hole mass measurement
§.§ mean and rms spectrum
we constructed the mean spectrum and the root-mean-square (rms) spectrum using the following definitions:
 
and
where  represents the -th spectrum in a set of  spectra collected during the monitoring campaign for each source.
the mean spectrum () represents the average flux at each wavelength across all epochs and typically exhibits a high signal-to-noise ratio (s/n). in contrast, the rms spectrum () characterises the variability at each wavelength, highlighting regions with significant temporal flux changes. for the final rms spectrum, we subtracted the contribution from measurement noise by estimating the observed variance at each wavelength and removing the average noise variance. this was carried out with inverse-variance weighting across epochs to account for differing uncertainties. to quantify the reliability of the rms spectrum, bootstrap resampling was used to estimate the  uncertainties, providing robust confidence intervals on the intrinsic variability. fig.  shows the mean and rms spectra for mrk 1048 and mrk 618 in the left and right panels, respectively. in each panel, solid and dotted lines denote the spectra before and after subtraction of the power-law continuum. prominent emission line regions are visible in both panels. the mean spectrum, benefiting from higher s/n, reveals strong features including both narrow and broad emission lines. the rms spectrum, while having lower s/n, also displays narrow emission lines that ideally should be absent. this is likely due to the use of data from different instruments and telescopes, where factors such as spectral alignment, instrumental resolution, and seeing conditions during observations can significantly impact the construction of the rms spectrum. consequently, as shown in fig. , both sources exhibit [o3] emission lines, which are more prominent in mrk 618 than in mrk 1048. the rms spectrum of mrk 1048 closely resembles that presented in . although noisier, the rms spectrum effectively isolates variable components by suppressing contributions from non-varying features such as narrow emission lines and host galaxy starlight. this makes it a valuable diagnostic for identifying intrinsically variable broad-line components. however, due to its lower signal-to-noise and sensitivity to noise fluctuations, measuring emission line widths from the rms spectrum remains challenging.  
§.§ line width and black hole mass measurement
to measure the black hole masses, we measured the full width at half maximum (fwhm) and the line dispersion () of the h and h emission line from both the mean and rms spectra after continuum subtraction. the fwhm was calculated by identifying the wavelengths corresponding to 50% of the maximum flux on the blue and red sides of the emission line profile, denoted as  and , respectively. the fwhm is then obtained as the difference  . to compute the line dispersion, we first determined the flux-weighted centroid of the line using the expression.
followed by calculating the second moment of the profile as
assuming that the motion of the blr gas is dominated by the gravitational potential of the central black hole, we measured the black hole mass using the virial relation from eq.. we adopted a scaling factor  for line dispersion-based measurements, and  for those based on fwhm . to estimate the uncertainties in the emission line widths and, consequently, the black hole mass, we employed a monte carlo bootstrap method following the approach of . for each realization,  spectra were randomly selected with replacement from the original set of  nightly spectra, from which the mean and rms spectra were reconstructed. similarly, for the continuum regions adjacent to each emission line, we incorporated their flux uncertainties into the analysis. at every monte carlo realization, the continuum level was randomly varied within its measured error range and then subtracted from the emission-line region. this step is important because the exact placement of the continuum directly affects the shape and strength of the residual emission line. by explicitly including this uncertainty, we ensure that errors arising from imperfect continuum determination are consistently carried into the final estimates of the emission-line width. consequently, the derived values of fwhm and  reflect not only the random noise present in the spectra but also the systematic uncertainty associated with continuum subtraction, providing a more realistic and reliable error budget. for h and h, the continuum sidebands were randomly varied within  å  of the nominal windows ([4780,4940] å for h and [6450,6680] å for h). a total of 5000 realizations were generated, each yielding a perturbed line profile from which both fwhm and  were measured. the median of the resulting distributions was adopted as the final value of the line width, and the 16th and 84th percentiles defined the 1 confidence interval. the instrumental resolution was also subtracted from the obtained fwhm and . the uncertainty in black hole mass measurement is measured by propagating the errors of lag  and line width . these values were consistently used to measure the black hole masses from the mean and rms spectra.
the mean and rms spectra for mrk 1048 (left) and mrk 618 (right). the solid indicates the original spectrum, while the dotted lines are the continuum-subtracted spectrum.
    
we used the lag values derived from the iccf method to measure the black hole masses for both sources. table  presents the results of black hole mass measurements based on both the h and h emission lines, using line widths obtained from the mean and rms spectra. the line widths are resolution-corrected with respect to adfosc and hfosc instrumental resolution. 
in the case of mrk 1048, black hole mass measures for h emission line are between  to  considering fwhm based on the mean and rms spectrum, respectively. additionally, using the  defined from eq.  as a line width estimator, the black hole mass is in  to . for h emission line, the black hole mass with fwhm is in the range of  to  and  to  with . notably, the fwhm and  of the h line are broader than those of h, consistent with previous findings that h tends to trace higher velocity gas in the blr <cit.>. this trend becomes more evident in the rms spectrum. the broader line widths seen in the rms spectra compared to the mean spectra may result from the reduced signal-to-noise ratio at the line wings in the mean spectrum, which can lead to underestimation of the true line width.
for mrk 618, the emission line widths are generally narrower than those of mrk 1048. from the mean spectrum, for the h emission line, the black hole mass ranges from  and  using fwhm and , respectively. for the h emission line, the black hole mass for mrk 618 is measured to be  and , respectively. similarly, for the rms spectrum, the masses are  and  for h, whereas for h, the masses are  and , respectively using fwhm and .
it is important to note that single-epoch black hole mass estimates are sensitive to the choice of line width used in the virial equation. while fwhm is commonly adopted in single-epoch mass measurements, rm studies involving multiple emission lines have shown that  offers a more reliable estimator of the virial velocity . since the rms spectrum effectively isolates variable components by removing non-varying features such as narrow emission lines and host galaxy contributions, it is generally more robust for black hole mass estimation. therefore, we adopt the  measurements from the rms spectra as our preferred measures of black hole mass. hence, the black hole mass of mrk 1048 is 6.30 as measured using both the h and 4.81 for h emission lines, whereas for mrk 618 the mass is calculated as 6.2 and 1.19 using h and h emission, respectively.
h and h line widths and black hole mass measurements with lower and upper limits.
source     line     fwhm(km s)      ()      (km s)      () 
(1)   (2)   (3)   (4)   (5)   (6)
6cmean spectrum measurements 
mrk 1048      h                        
h                        
mrk 618       h                       
h                       
6crms spectrum measurements 
mrk 1048      h                        
h                       
mrk 618       h                       
h                       
note: columns are (1) object name, (2) the line used for calculations, (3) the full-width at half-maximum of the emission line in km s. (4) black hole mass measured using fwhm. (5)  (km s): line dispersion (second moment) of the emission line profile. (6) black hole mass measured using . unit of black hole masses is .
§ discussion
§.§ size–luminosity relation
mrk 1048 was previously monitored as part of the lamp 2016 campaign  measuring h rest-frame time lag of  days and . in comparison, our monitoring spanning october 2022 to march 2023 yielded a rest-frame h lag of  days and a higher . in a more recent effort,  included mrk 1048 (ngc 985) in a large-scale photometric rm (prm) campaign using narrow-band targeting the h emission line in nearby seyfert galaxies (). for mrk 1048, they obtained a single-epoch spectrum and modeled the broad h emission line. using their refined prm formalism, they derived a rest-frame h time lag of  days, which is comparable with our measured rest frame lag of  days.
mrk 618 was previously observed in a 2012 rm campaign by , where no significant h lag was detected due to a shorter monitoring period. in contrast, the recent multi-year campaign by  reported lag detections across four seasons (2019–2023), with h lags ranging from  to  days. the strongest signal occurred in season 2, whereas the lag of season 3 was deemed less reliable due to a dual-peaked cross-correlation function. our current rm campaign independently confirms a strong reverberation signature in mrk 618. we detect rest frame time lag of  days (iccf) for -band vs h and  days for -band vs h (table ), which is consistent with the best lag value of 15.2 reported by maha campaign in their season 4 observations. these results reaffirm the presence of a responsive blr in mrk 618.
we placed mrk 1048 and mrk 618 on the h-based blr size–luminosity (–) plot using the empirical relation:
where the slope  and intercept  with intrinsic scatter 0.32 dex, as calibrated by <cit.> and with slope  and intercept  by <cit.> with intrinsic scatter 0.23 dex. for mrk 1048, with  erg s, the predicted h blr sizes are  light-days (s2024) and  light-days (w2024), whereas our rm measurement yields a smaller lag of  light-days. in contrast, for mrk 618, with  erg s, the predicted sizes are  light-days (s2024) and  light-days (w2024), while our measured lag is comparable at  light-days. these discrepancies are within 1 limit from the global – relation for mrk 1048. this is visualised in fig. .
correcting for host galaxy contamination is essential for accurately determining agn luminosities, as it significantly impacts the size–luminosity relation and can introduce substantial uncertainties if unaccounted for. we applied the empirical host-fraction relation from , which is based on the host contamination measurement from sdss spectra, and estimated host contributions of  for mrk 1048 and  for mrk 618. this yields host-subtracted agn continuum luminosities of erg s and  erg s, respectively. recalculating the expected blr sizes with these corrected values, we obtain  and  light-days (s2024 and w2024, respectively) for mrk 1048, and  and  light-days for mrk 618. 
to cross-check our spectro-photometric h lag measurements, we estimated the blr sizes using the directly measured 5100 å continuum luminosities and the h-based – relations from <cit.> and <cit.>. for this, we used eq.  for the h emission line with , , and scatter =0.32 dex based on s2025, and , , with scatter =0.31dex based on c2023. using the total luminosities, the predicted blr sizes for mrk 1048 are  and  light-days (c2023 and s2025, respectively), compared to our measured lag of  light-days. for mrk 618, the predictions are  and  light-days, while our measured lag is comparable at  light-days. applying host-galaxy correction, the agn-only 5100å luminosities yield revised  values of  and  light-days (c2023 and s2025, respectively) for mrk 1048, and  and  light-days for mrk 618. the mrk 1048 is within a factor of 1.2, and mrk 618 shows a factor of 1.4 times larger measured lag than predicted from the h-based – relation. this is shown in fig. , consistent with the deviation observed in the h-based scaling. 
the standard – relation tends to overpredict the blr sizes of high-accretion agns with strong fe ii emission.  proposed a refined relation incorporating the relative fe ii strength, , showing that higher  values correspond to shorter h lags at fixed luminosity. for mrk 618, we measure , suggesting a predicted blr size below 7 light-days. however, our measured h lag is slightly longer at 10.2 light-days, indicating that mrk 618 deviates minimally from this trend.
§.§ stratification of blr
we computed the ratio of h to h lags to assess the ionisation stratification of the blr in our sources. for mrk 1048, this ratio is:
and for mrk 618:
these ratios indicate that in mrk 1048, the h-emitting region lies farther out in the blr than the h-emitting region, consistent with expectations from photoionisation stratification. in contrast, the ratio for mrk 618 suggests a more co-spatial origin of the two lines, potentially linked to a flatter radial ionisation profile or more compact blr geometry.
our result for mrk 1048 notably contrasts with the value of  reported by s2025, who adopted the h lag of  days from  and derived a rest-frame h lag of  days. their reported ratio was among the highest in their sample and interpreted as strong evidence for radial stratification in the blr. in contrast, our updated measurements yield a more moderate ratio of , which lies closer to the average and median values reported in the literature. specifically, s2025 reported a mean h/h lag ratio of  and a median of across their full sample, consistent with earlier studies by , , and , which reported average ratios around 1.4. our revised result thus falls well within this statistically expected range, suggesting that s2025 high-ratio estimates may have been inflated due to sparse cadence, low signal-to-noise, or systematics in non-uniform spectral sampling. this reinforces the value of dedicated, well-calibrated, and high-cadence monitoring campaigns in accurately tracing blr stratification.
furthermore, our measured ratio for mrk 1048 is more consistent with the typical range of 1.2-1.8 found by c2023 for high-luminosity agns using a recalibrated h-h blr structure analysis. this comparison underscores the importance of uniform and simultaneous spectral monitoring for reliably interpreting blr stratification and dynamics.
§.§ black hole masses
mrk 1048: line width comparisons show that while  found fwhm 4830  80 kms and  1840  58 kms, our results are fwhm4677kms and 2193kms. however, our broader rms spectrum values (fwhm4975kms,  2678kms) are compared to those from the lamp campaign (4042  406 kms and 1726  76kms) indicate that our data captured a larger portion of the line variability, possibly tracing higher-velocity components of the blr. consequently, the black hole mass measured by  using the rms  was , which is significantly lower than our result of , a factor of 3 difference. aditionally, our directly measured continuum luminosity at 5100å is  erg s, is consistent with the  erg s reported by . the difference in the black hole mass estimate could be due to a lack of host galaxy correction, variability differences in both monitoring campaigns, and broader line width measurement. while  identified infalling blr kinematics using velocity-resolved rm, we were not able to perform such an analysis due to the limited number of epochs in our campaign.  reported a black hole mass of  using the fwhm of the h line. our mass measurement is in closer agreement with theirs.  their host-subtracted continuum luminosity at 5100å was derived using the flux variation gradient (fvg) method, while the eddington ratio of  (which is closer to our estimate of ) was computed via fe ii emission line strength. the slight discrepancy in mass measurement may stem from differences in the method used for blr size measurement (their photometric rm compared to our spectroscopic rm), emission line width treatment, single-epoch assumptions, or line modeling details.
for mrk 618, the integrated line widths derived from our spectra yield fwhm values of 2261 km s (mean) and  km s (rms) for h, and corresponding  values of  km s and  km s. these values are slighlty smaller with the range of fwhm = 2387–3219 km s and  = 1279-1650 kms reported in maha. additionally, our h measurements display consistent broadening behavior, indicating a stable blr geometry across multiple lines and epochs. furthermore, our decomposition of the h profile reveals a mild asymmetry that leans toward the blue wing, which aligns with the findings of the maha campaign, that show evolving line asymmetry across seasons. specifically, maha reported h asymmetry values ranging from  to , suggesting a shift from disk-like dynamics (season 2) to an outflow-dominated geometry (season 4). while we do not perform velocity-resolved lag measurements in our current dataset, the presence of asymmetry in the line profiles hints at similar kinematic complexities. our directly measured continuum luminosity at 5100å is  erg s, which reduces to  erg s after correcting for the host galaxy contribution, which is lower than the maha season 4 value of  erg s. the decreasing trend in l across the maha seasons from 4.73 to 3.31  erg s is aligned with the lower luminosity recorded in our campaign, further supporting the observed decline in agn activity.
the plot illustrates the relationship between the h blr size and the optical continuum luminosity at 5100å. a range of reverberation-mapped (rm) agn samples from the literature are overplotted for comparison. these include seambhs <cit.>, sdssrm-2024 sources <cit.>, ozdes agns <cit.>, lamp sources <cit.>, and samp sources <cit.>. additional rm sources from various studies <cit.> are also included. the maroon and black dashed line represents the best-fit – relation as reported by  and , respectively. our target sources, mrk 1048 and mrk 618, are marked with a filled blue triangle and a filled orange circle, respectively. mrk 1048 moves towards upper left, while mrk 618 moves towards lower right, to the best-fit relation. these are still lying closer to the best-fit relation.
    
the relationship between the h blr size and the monochromatic continuum luminosity at 5100å is shown. reverberation-mapped (rm) sources with h lag measurements from previous studies are overplotted for comparison, including those from , , , , and , , , along with additional sources from , , and . the maroon and black dashed line represents the best-fit – relation as derived by  and , respectively. our target agns, mrk 1048 and mrk 618, are plotted as a filled blue triangle and a filled orange circle, respectively. the previous measure of h for mrk 1048  is also marked with an open triangle. mrk 618 lies closer to the h best-fit relation, while mrk 1048 is showing a slightly more offset than  study.
    
§.§ implication of sarm observation
to estimate the angular extent of the blr, we used our directly measured blr radii from h and h time lags, along with angular diameter distances derived under a standard cdm cosmology (, , ). the angular size was calculated using the relation:
where  is the blr radius in parsecs, and  is the angular diameter distance in megaparsecs. the resulting angular size was then converted to microarcseconds (). 
for mrk 1048, our measured h and h lags of  and  light-days corresponds to blr radii of  pc and  pc, given that  pc, adopting a redshift of . with an angular diameter distance of  mpc, the angular sizes are  (h) and  (h). for mrk 618 (), our h and h lags of  and  light-days yield blr radii of  pc and  pc, respectively. with  mpc, the corresponding angular sizes are  (h) and  (h).
these angular sizes are generally smaller than those predicted in , who report, for instance,  for mrk 1048 based on an assumed blr size of 48.6 light-days. the discrepancy likely reflects differences in blr size measurements across epochs and methods. nonetheless, the scales we derive remain within the reach of the interferometric resolution of gravity. 
the pa emission line (m), commonly used in spectroastrometry, is redshifted to m for mrk 1048, which lies around the window edge within gravity's -band coverage (–m). however, for mrk 618, the redshifted pa line appears at m, just outside the lower limit of this band, limiting its accessibility. in such cases, alternative broad emission lines such as brackett  (br, m), he i (m), h 1–0 s(1) (m), and [si vi] (m) are viable options. for both mrk 1048 and mrk 618, these lines redshift to within the -band window and offer promising alternatives, however challenging for spatially resolving the blr kinematics using gravity/gravity+.
to improve sarm measurements, efforts should be made to achieve better consistency and reduce systematic uncertainties on the data <cit.>. a key improvement would be the use of the same broad emission line, such as pa or h, in both spectroastrometry and reverberation mapping observations, ensuring that both methods probe the same physical region of the broad-line region (blr). although one of the goals of our campaign was to observe the infrared lines, the number of such epochs is too few to perform a detailed investigation for the lag measurement. additionally, conducting these observations (rm and sa) jointly or within the dynamical timescale of blr can minimise biases arising from temporal variations in the blr structure. incorporating information from velocity-resolved reverberation mapping and polarimetry can help constrain key physical parameters such as inclination, opening angle, and the degree of ordered motion in the blr. expanding the sample size to include well-monitored agns and improving the precision of interferometric phase measurements will further reduce both statistical and systematic errors.
§ conclusion
we observed the sources mrk 1048 and mrk 618 among the seven sources selected from  with the aim of performing sarm studies. our spectro-photometric weekly cadence monitoring of mrk 1048 and mrk 618 was conducted between october 2022 and march 2023 using optical and nir instruments such as adfosc and tanspec mounted at the 3.6-m dot and the hfosc mounted on the 2-m hct. broad-band photometric monitoring was done using v, r, and sdss r filters immediately before spectroscopy. intercalibrated -band light curves, using asas-sn and ztf data, were adopted as the primary continuum driver after alignment via pycali. this work covers the first part of the sarm, i.e., rm analysis. we gathered the following results for mrk 1048 and mrk 618.
eginenumerate
    
  * mrk 1048 shows moderate continuum variability with a fractional variability amplitude () of 7.30% in the -band, while the h and h emission lines exhibit slightly higher variability, at 10.30% and 6.75%, respectively. the corresponding maximum-to-minimum flux ratios () are 1.42 (-band), 1.50 (h), and 1.27 (h). in contrast, mrk 618 displays a lower continuum variability () but a more pronounced variability in its emission lines, with 7.68% for h and a notably higher 13.91% for h. the emission lines in both sources exhibit greater flux variability than the continuum, consistent with reverberation expectations, and h consistently appears stronger and more variable than h in both objects.
    
  * using iccf-based lags and optical luminosities, both sources were placed on the – relation for h and h emission lines. for mrk 1048, the h lag is 10.5 days with  erg s, while h gives a longer lag of 18.7 days. for mrk 618, the h and h lags are 10.2 and 14.4 days, respectively, with a lower luminosity of  erg s. both sources exhibit mildly deviated and broadly consistent with the – relation, with mrk 618 appearing slightly offset in h, however, more in h. whereas, for mrk 1048 deviated in h and more closer to h, reflecting structural or ionization differences in their blrs.
    
  * black hole mass measures for mrk 1048 range from 4.2 to , with h. for mrk 618, narrower line widths yield lower masses, ranging from  to  depending on the choice of line-width and emission line. as  from rms spectra best isolates the variable blr component, we adopt these as our preferred values:  for mrk 1048 and 1.19 for mrk 618.    
sr acknowledges partial support from the science and engineering research board (serb), department of science and technology (dst), government of india, through the start-up research grant (srg) no. srg/2021/001334. j.h.w. acknowledges the support from the basic science research program through the national research foundation of the korean government (grant no. nrf-2021r1a2c3008486). a.k.m. acknowledges the support from the european research council (erc) under the european union’s horizon 2020 research and innovation program (grant no. 951549).
this study makes use of data obtained from the 3.6-m devasthal optical telescope (dot), a national facility operated by the aryabhatta research institute of observational sciences (aries), and the 2-m himalayan chandra telescope (hct). aries is an autonomous institute under the dst, government of india. we are grateful to the scientific and technical staff at aries for their invaluable support during dot observations. the tifr–aries near infrared spectrometer (tanspec) mounted on dot was developed jointly by tifr, aries, and mkir, hawaii. we thank the 3.6-m dot and ir astronomy teams at tifr for their assistance during tanspec observations. we also acknowledge the support provided by the staff at the indian astronomical observatory (iao), hanle, and the crest facility in hosakote, both operated by the indian institute of astrophysics (iia), bengaluru, for enabling observations with hct.
3.6-m dot(adfosc, tanspec), 2-m hct(hfosc)
mapspec , pyqsofit , pycali , pyccf , javelin , pyiccf  
§ analysis of detrended lightcurve
we detrended the continuum and emission-line light curves by fitting a straight line to each and subtracting the corresponding best-fit model to obtain the residual (detrended) variations as described in sec. . fig.   and table  illustrates, the light curves and lag results for the entire campaign after detrending.
detrended light curve analysis for mrk 1048 and mrk 618. the top-left panel shows the photometric -band continuum with data points from different telescopes labeled. the middle and bottom left panels display the h and h emission-line flux variations (in arbitrary units), each fitted with a best-fit linear trend shown in red, that has been subtracted to obtain the detrended light curves. the -band continuum is overlaid for comparison, normalized and shifted to the final adopted lag values listed in table . the javelin model for each light curve is shown in steel blue. the right panels show the corresponding lag distributions from iccf (teal histograms) and javelin (violet histograms). the magenta dashed curve represents the cross-correlation function (ccf), with the left axis showing  and the right axis showing the probability density . the darker magenta region marks the central 80% of the ccf peak used to determine the iccf centroid lag. the vertical dashed lines indicate the 16th and 84th percentile uncertainties of the lag distributions.
detrended time delays (lags) for mrk 1048 and mrk 618 using iccf, javelin, and pyiccf.
2*source     2*light curve    
2ciccf    
1cjavelin    
2cpyiccf 
(lr)3-4(lr)5-5(lr)6-7
        lag (days)          lag (days)      lag (days)      p-value
(1)     (2)     (3)     (4)     (5)     (6)     (7) 
2*mrk 1048
      -band vs h          0.50               0.30 
-band vs h         0.62               0.25 
2*mrk 618
      -band vs h          0.30               0.27 
-band vs h         0.28               0.72 
[flushleft]
* note. all lags here are from detrended light curves and are quoted in the observer frame. columns: (1) source; (2) light-curve pair; (3) iccf centroid lag; (4) cross-correlation coefficient ; (5) javelin lag; (6) pyiccf lag; (7) pyiccf null-hypothesis -value.
aasjournalv7
natexlab#1#1
[a. amorim et al.(2021)amorim, bauböck, bentz, brandner, bolzer, clénet, davies, de zeeuw, dexter, drescher, eckart, eisenhauer, förster schreiber, garcia, genzel, gillessen, gratadour, hönig, kaltenbrunner, kishimoto, lacour, lutz, millour, netzer, onken, ott, paumard, perraut, perrin, petrucci, pfuhl, prieto, rouan, shangguan, shimizu, stadler, sternberg, straub, straubmeier, street, sturm, tacconi, tristram, vermot, von fellenberg, widmann, & woillez]gravity2021
amorim, a., bauböck, m., bentz, m. c., et al. 2021, titlea geometric distance to the supermassive black hole of ngc 3783, astronomy & amp; astrophysics, 654, a85, 10.1051/0004-6361/202141426
[j. n. bahcall et al.(1972)bahcall, kozlovsky, salpeter, bahcall, kozlovsky, & salpeter]bahcall1972
bahcall, j. n., kozlovsky, b.-z., salpeter, e. e., et al. 1972, titleon the time dependence of emission-line strengths from a photoionized nebula, apj, 171, 467, 10.1086/151300
[k. barbary(2016)barbary]barbary2016
barbary, k. 2016, titlesep: source extractor as a library, journal of open source software, 1, 58, 10.21105/joss.00058
[a. j. barth et al.(2015)barth, bennert, canalizo, filippenko, gates, greene, li, malkan, pancoast, sand, stern, treu, woo, assef, bae, brewer, cenko, clubb, cooper, diamond-stanic, hiner, hönig, hsiao, kandrashoff, lazarova, nierenberg, rex, silverman, tollerud, & walsh]barth2015
barth, a. j., bennert, v. n., canalizo, g., et al. 2015, titlethe lick agn monitoring project 2011: spectroscopic campaign and emission-line light curves, , 217, 26, 10.1088/0067-0049/217/2/26
[m. c. bentz et al.(2010)bentz, walsh, barth, yoshii, woo, wang, treu, thornton, street, steele, silverman, serduke, sakata, minezaki, malkan, li, lee, hiner, hidas, greene, gates, ganeshalingam, filippenko, canalizo, bennert, & baliber]bentz2010
bentz, m. c., walsh, j. l., barth, a. j., et al. 2010, titlethe lick agn monitoring project: reverberation mapping of optical hydrogen and helium recombination lines, the astrophysical journal, 716, 993, 10.1088/0004-637x/716/2/993
[m. c. bentz et al.(2013)bentz, denney, grier, barth, peterson, vestergaard, bennert, canalizo, de rosa, filippenko, gates, greene, li, malkan, pogge, stern, treu, & woo]bentz_low-luminosity_2013
bentz, m. c., denney, k. d., grier, c. j., et al. 2013, titlethe low-luminosity end of the radius-luminosity relationship for active galactic nuclei, apj, 767, 149, 10.1088/0004-637x/767/2/149
[m. c. bentz et al.(2014)bentz, horenstein, bazhaw, manne-nicholas, ou-yang, anderson, jones, norris, parks, saylor, teems, & turner]bentz2014apj...796....8b
bentz, m. c., horenstein, d., bazhaw, c., et al. 2014, titlethe mass of the central black hole in the nearby seyfert galaxy ngc 5273, , 796, 8, 10.1088/0004-637x/796/1/8
[m. beroiz et al.(2020)beroiz, cabral, & sanchez]astroalign
beroiz, m., cabral, j., & sanchez, b. 2020, titleastroalign: a python module for astronomical image registration, astronomy and computing, 32, 100384, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ascom.2020.100384
[r. d. blandford et al.(1982)blandford, mckee, blandford, & mckee]blandford1982
blandford, r. d., mckee, c. f., blandford, r. d., & mckee, c. f. 1982, titlereverberation mapping of the emission line regions of seyfert galaxies and quasars., apj, 255, 419, 10.1086/159843
[e. d. bontà et al.(2020)bontà, peterson, bentz, brandt, ciroi, rosa, alvarez, grier, hall, hernández santisteban, ho, homayouni, horne, kochanek, li, morelli, pizzella, pogge, schneider, shen, trump, & vestergaard]bonta2020
bontà, e. d., peterson, b. m., bentz, m. c., et al. 2020, titlethe sloan digital sky survey reverberation mapping project: estimating masses of black holes in quasars with single-epoch spectroscopy, apj, 903, 112, 10.3847/1538-4357/abbc1c
[t. a. boroson & r. f. green(1992)boroson & green]boroson1992
boroson, t. a., & green, r. f. 1992, titlethe emission-line properties of low-redshift quasi-stellar objects, , 80, 109, 10.1086/191661
[e. m. cackett et al.(2021)cackett, bentz, & kara]cackett2021
cackett, e. m., bentz, m. c., & kara, e. 2021, titlereverberation mapping of active galactic nuclei: from x-ray corona to dusty torus, isci, 24, 102557, 10.1016/j.isci.2021.102557
[h. cho et al.(2020)cho, woo, hodges-kluck, son, shin, gallo, bae, brink, cho, filippenko, horst, ilić, joner, kang, kang, kaspi, kim, kovačević, kumar, le, nadzhip, nuñez, metlov, oknyansky, park, popović, rakshit, schramm, shatsky, spencer, sung, il sung, tatarnikov, & vince]cho_2020
cho, h., woo, j.-h., hodges-kluck, e., et al. 2020, titlevariability and the size–luminosity relation of the intermediate-mass agn in ngc 4395, the astrophysical journal, 892, 93, 10.3847/1538-4357/ab7a98
[h. cho et al.(2023)cho, woo, wang, son, shin, rakshit, barth, bennert, gallo, hodges-kluck, treu, bae, cho, foord, geum, jadhav, jeon, kabasares, kang, kang, kim, kim, kim, kim, le, malkan, mandal, park, park, sung, u, & williams]cho2023
cho, h., woo, j.-h., wang, s., et al. 2023, titlethe seoul national university agn monitoring project iv: h reverberation mapping of 6 agns and the h size-luminosity relation, arxiv e-prints, arxiv:2306.16683, 10.48550/arxiv.2306.16683
[g. de rosa et al.(2018)de rosa, fausnaugh, grier, peterson, denney, horne, bentz, ciroi, dalla bontà, joner, kaspi, kochanek, pogge, sergeev, vestergaard, adams, antognini, araya salvo, armstrong, bae, barth, beatty, bhattacharjee, borman, boroson, bottorff, brown, brown, brotherton, coker, clanton, cracco, crawford, croxall, eftekharzadeh, eracleous, fiorenza, frassati, hawkins, henderson, holoien, hutchison, kellar, kilerci-eser, kim, king, la mura, laney, li, lochhaas, ma, macinnis, manne-nicholas, mason, mcgraw, mogren, montouri, moody, mosquera, mudd, musso, nazarov, nguyen, ochner, okhmat, onken, ou-yang, pancoast, pei, penny, poleski, portaluri, prieto, price-whelan, pulatova, rafter, roettenbacher, romero-colmenero, runnoe, schimoia, shappee, sherf, simonian, siviero, skowron, skowron, somers, spencer,
  starkey, stevens, stoll, tamajo, tayar, van saders, valenti, villanueva, villforth, weiss, winkler, zastrow, zhu, & zu]derosa2018
de rosa, g., fausnaugh, m. m., grier, c. j., et al. 2018, titlevelocity-resolved reverberation mapping of five bright seyfert 1 galaxies, , 866, 133, 10.3847/1538-4357/aadd11
[p. g. v. dokkum(2001)dokkum]dokkum_cosmicray_2001
dokkum, p. g. v. 2001, titlecosmic‐ray rejection by laplacian edge detection, pasp, 113, 1420, 10.1086/323894
[p. du & j.-m. wang(2019)du & wang]du_2019
du, p., & wang, j.-m. 2019, titlethe radius–luminosity relationship depends on optical spectra in active galactic nuclei, the astrophysical journal, 886, 42, 10.3847/1538-4357/ab4908
[p. du et al.(2015)du, hu, lu, huang, cheng, qiu, li, zhang, fan, bai, bian, yuan, kaspi, ho, netzer, & wang]du2015
du, p., hu, c., lu, k. x., et al. 2015, titlesupermassive black holes with high accretion rates in active galactic nuclei. iv. h time lags and implications for super-eddington accretion, apj, 806, 22, 10.1088/0004-637x/806/1/22
[p. du et al.(2016a)du, lu, zhang, huang, wang, hu, qiu, li, fan, fang, bai, bian, yuan, ho, wang, & collaboration)]du2016
du, p., lu, k.-x., zhang, z.-x., et al. 2016a, titlesupermassive black holes with high accretion rates in active galactic nuclei. v. a new size–luminosity scaling relation for the broad-line region, the astrophysical journal, 825, 126, 10.3847/0004-637x/825/2/126
[p. du et al.(2016b)du, lu, zhang, huang, wang, hu, qiu, li, fan, fang, bai, bian, yuan, ho, wang, & collaboration)]du_2016
du, p., lu, k.-x., zhang, z.-x., et al. 2016b, titlesupermassive black holes with high accretion rates in active galactic nuclei. v. a new size–luminosity scaling relation for the broad-line region, the astrophysical journal, 825, 126, 10.3847/0004-637x/825/2/126
[p. du et al.(2018)du, zhang, wang, huang, zhang, lu, hu, li, bai, bian, yuan, ho, wang, & collaboration)]du_2018
du, p., zhang, z.-x., wang, k., et al. 2018, titlesupermassive black holes with high accretion rates in active galactic nuclei. ix. 10 new observations of reverberation mapping and shortened hβ lags, the astrophysical journal, 856, 6, 10.3847/1538-4357/aaae6b
[r. edelson et al.(2019)edelson, gelbord, cackett, peterson, horne, barth, starkey, bentz, brandt, goad, joner, korista, netzer, page, uttley, vaughan, breeveld, cenko, done, evans, fausnaugh, ferland, gonzalez-buitrago, gropp, grupe, kaastra, kennea, kriss, mathur, mehdipour, mudd, nousek, schmidt, vestergaard, & villforth]edelson2019
edelson, r., gelbord, j., cackett, e., et al. 2019, titlethe first swift intensive agn accretion disk reverberation mapping survey, , 870, 123, 10.3847/1538-4357/aaf3b4
[m. elvis & m. karovska(2002)elvis & karovska]elvis_2002
elvis, m., & karovska, m. 2002, titlequasar parallax: a method for determining direct geometrical distances to quasars, the astrophysical journal, 581, l67, 10.1086/346015
[m. m. fausnaugh(2017)fausnaugh]mapspec
fausnaugh, m. m. 2017, titlea new approach to the internal calibration of reverberation-mapping spectra, , 129, 024007, 10.1088/1538-3873/129/972/024007
[m. m. fausnaugh et al.(2017)fausnaugh, grier, bentz, denney, rosa, peterson, kochanek, pogge, adams, barth, beatty, bhattacharjee, borman, boroson, bottorff, brown, brown, brotherton, coker, crawford, croxall, eftekharzadeh, eracleous, joner, henderson, holoien, horne, hutchison, kaspi, kim, king, li, lochhaas, ma, macinnis, manne-nicholas, mason, montuori, mosquera, mudd, musso, nazarov, nguyen, okhmat, onken, ou-yang, pancoast, pei, penny, poleski, rafter, romero-colmenero, runnoe, sand, schimoia, sergeev, shappee, simonian, somers, spencer, starkey, stevens, tayar, treu, valenti, saders, villanueva jr., villforth, weiss, winkler, & zhu]fausnaugh2017
fausnaugh, m. m., grier, c. j., bentz, m. c., et al. 2017, titlereverberation mapping of optical emission lines in five active galaxies, apj, 840, 97, 10.3847/1538-4357/aa6d52
[h.-c. feng et al.(2021)feng, liu, bai, yang, hu, li, yang, lu, & xiao]feng_2021
feng, h.-c., liu, h. t., bai, j. m., et al. 2021, titlevelocity-resolved reverberation mapping of changing-look agn ngc 2617, the astrophysical journal, 912, 92, 10.3847/1538-4357/abefe0
[e. l. fitzpatrick(1999)fitzpatrick]fitzpatrick1999
fitzpatrick, e. l. 1999, titlecorrecting for the effects of interstellar extinction, , 111, 63, 10.1086/316293
[c. m. gaskell & l. s. sparke(1986)gaskell & sparke]gaskell1986
gaskell, c. m., & sparke, l. s. 1986, titleline variations in quasars and seyfert galaxies, , 305, 175, 10.1086/164238
[s. ghosh et al.(2023)ghosh, ninan, ojha, & sharma]ghosh2023
ghosh, s., ninan, j. p., ojha, d. k., & sharma, s. 2023, titlepytanspec: a data reduction package for tanspec, journal of astrophysics and astronomy, 44, 30, 10.1007/s12036-023-09926-y
[d. h. gonzález-buitrago et al.(2023)gonzález-buitrago, garcía-díaz, pozo nuñez, & guo]buitrago2023
gonzález-buitrago, d. h., garcía-díaz, m. t., pozo nuñez, f., & guo, h. 2023, titleon the nature of the continuum reverberation of x-ray/uv and optical emission of iras 09149-6206, , 525, 4524, 10.1093/mnras/stad2483
[m. j. graham et al.(2019)graham, kulkarni, bellm, adams, barbarino, blagorodnova, bodewits, bolin, brady, cenko, chang, coughlin, de, eadie, farnham, feindt, franckowiak, fremling, gezari, ghosh, goldstein, golkhou, goobar, ho, huppenkothen, ivezić, jones, juric, kaplan, kasliwal, kelley, kupfer, lee, lin, lunnan, mahabal, miller, ngeow, nugent, ofek, prince, rauch, van roestel, schulze, singer, sollerman, taddia, yan, ye, yu, barlow, bauer, beck, belicki, biswas, brinnel, brooke, bue, bulla, burruss, connolly, cromer, cunningham, dekany, delacroix, desai, duev, feeney, flynn, frederick, gal-yam, giomi, groom, hacopians, hale, helou, henning, hover, hillenbrand, howell, hung, imel, ip, jackson, kaspi, kaye, kowalski, kramer, kuhn, landry, laher, mao, masci, monkewitz, murphy, nordin, patterson,
  penprase, porter, rebbapragada, reiley, riddle, rigault, rodriguez, rusholme, van santen, shupe, smith, soumagnac, stein, surace, szkody, terek, van sistine, van velzen, vestrand, walters, ward, zhang, & zolkower]graham2019
graham, m. j., kulkarni, s. r., bellm, e. c., et al. 2019, titlethe zwicky transient facility: science objectives, , 131, 078001, 10.1088/1538-3873/ab006c
[ gravity collaboration et al.(2018)gravity collaboration, sturm, dexter, pfuhl, stock, davies, lutz, clénet, eckart, eisenhauer, genzel, gratadour, hönig, kishimoto, lacour, millour, netzer, perrin, peterson, petrucci, rouan, waisberg, woillez, amorim, brandner, förster schreiber, garcia, gillessen, ott, paumard, perraut, scheithauer, straubmeier, tacconi, & widmann]gravity2018
gravity collaboration, sturm, e., dexter, j., et al. 2018, titlespatially resolved rotation of the broad-line region of a quasar at sub-parsec scale, , 563, 657, 10.1038/s41586-018-0731-9
[ gravity collaboration et al.(2020)gravity collaboration, amorim, brandner, clénet, davies, de zeeuw, dexter, eckart, eisenhauer, schreiber, gao, garcia, genzel, gillessen, gratadour, hönig, kishimoto, lacour, lutz, millour, netzer, ott, paumard, perraut, perrin, peterson, petrucci, pfuhl, prieto, rouan, shangguan, shimizu, schartmann, sternberg, straub, straubmeier, sturm, tacconi, tristram, vermot, von fellenberg, waisberg, widmann, & woillez]gravity2020
gravity collaboration, amorim, a., brandner, w., et al. 2020, titlethe spatially resolved broad line region of iras 09149-6206, astronomy and astrophysics, 643, 10.1051/0004-6361/202039067
[ gravity collaboration et al.(2024)gravity collaboration, amorim, bourdarot, brandner, cao, clénet, davies, de zeeuw, dexter, drescher, eckart, eisenhauer, fabricius, feuchtgruber, förster schreiber, garcia, genzel, gillessen, gratadour, hönig, kishimoto, lacour, lutz, millour, netzer, ott, paumard, perraut, perrin, peterson, petrucci, pfuhl, prieto, rabien, rouan, santos, shangguan, shimizu, sternberg, straubmeier, sturm, tacconi, tristram, widmann, & woillez]gravity2024
gravity collaboration, amorim, a., bourdarot, g., et al. 2024, titlethe size-luminosity relation of local active galactic nuclei from interferometric observations of the broad-line region, , 684, a167, 10.1051/0004-6361/202348167
[j. e. greene & l. c. ho(2005)greene & ho]greene_estimating_2005
greene, j. e., & ho, l. c. 2005, titleestimating black hole masses in active galaxies using the hα emission line, apj, 630, 122, 10.1086/431897
[c. j. grier et al.(2017)grier, trump, shen, horne, kinemuchi, mcgreer, starkey, brandt, hall, kochanek, chen, denney, greene, ho, homayouni, i-hsiu li, pei, peterson, petitjean, schneider, sun, alsayyad, bizyaev, brinkmann, brownstein, bundy, dawson, eftekharzadeh, fernandez-trincado, gao, hutchinson, jia, jiang, oravetz, pan, paris, ponder, peters, rogerson, simmons, smith, & wang]grier2017
grier, c. j., trump, j. r., shen, y., et al. 2017, titlethe sloan digital sky survey reverberation mapping project: h and h reverberation measurements from first-year spectroscopy and photometry, , 851, 21, 10.3847/1538-4357/aa98dc
[h. guo(2023)guo]guo_legolasonpyqsofit_2023
guo, h. 2023, titlelegolason/pyqsofit, 
[h. guo et al.(2022)guo, barth, & wang]guo2022
guo, h., barth, a. j., & wang, s. 2022, titleagn continuum reverberation mapping based on zwicky transient facility light curves, arxiv e-prints, arxiv:2207.06432.
2207.06432
[h. guo et al.(2019)guo, liu, shen, loeb, monroe, & prochaska]guo_constraining_2019
guo, h., liu, x., shen, y., et al. 2019, titleconstraining sub-parsec binary supermassive black holes in quasars with multi-epoch spectroscopy – iii. candidates from continued radial velocity tests, mnras, 482, 3288, 10.1093/mnras/sty2920
[h. guo et al.(2018)guo, shen, & wang]guopyqsofit
guo, h., shen, y., & wang, s. 2018, titlepyqsofit: python code to fit the spectrum of quasars,, ascl soft 1809.008
[c. hu et al.(2021)hu, li, yang, yang, guo, bao, jiang, du, li, xiao, songsheng, yu, bai, ho, brotherton, aceituno, winkler, wang, & seambh collaboration]hu2021
hu, c., li, s.-s., yang, s., et al. 2021, titlesupermassive black holes with high accretion rates in active galactic nuclei. xii. reverberation mapping results for 15 pg quasars from a long-duration high-cadence campaign, , 253, 20, 10.3847/1538-4365/abd774
[p. jalan et al.(2023)jalan, rakshit, woo, kotilainen, & stalin]jalan2023
jalan, p., rakshit, s., woo, j.-j., kotilainen, j., & stalin, c. s. 2023, titlean empirical relation to estimate host galaxy stellar light from agn spectra, , 521, l11, 10.1093/mnrasl/slad014
[s. kaspi et al.(2000)kaspi, smith, netzer, maoz, jannuzi, & giveon]kaspi2000
kaspi, s., smith, p. s., netzer, h., et al. 2000, titlereverberation measurements for 17 quasars and the size‐mass‐luminosity relations in active galactic nuclei, apj, 533, 631, 10.1086/308704
[b. c. kelly et al.(2009)kelly, bechtold, & siemiginowska]kelly2009
kelly, b. c., bechtold, j., & siemiginowska, a. 2009, titleare the variations in quasar optical flux driven by thermal fluctuations?, , 698, 895, 10.1088/0004-637x/698/1/895
[b. c. kelly et al.(2014)kelly, becker, sobolewska, siemiginowska, & uttley]kelly2014
kelly, b. c., becker, a. c., sobolewska, m., siemiginowska, a., & uttley, p. 2014, titleflexible and scalable methods for quantifying stochastic variability in the era of massive time-domain astronomical data sets, , 788, 33, 10.1088/0004-637x/788/1/33
[c. s. kochanek et al.(2017)kochanek, shappee, stanek, holoien, thompson, prieto, dong, shields, will, britt, perzanowski, & pojmański]kochanek2017
kochanek, c. s., shappee, b. j., stanek, k. z., et al. 2017, titlethe all-sky automated survey for supernovae (asas-sn) light curve server v1.0, , 129, 104502, 10.1088/1538-3873/aa80d9
[b. kumar et al.(2018)kumar, omar, maheswar, pandey, sagar, uddin, sanwal, bangia, kumar, yadav, sahu, pant, reddy, gupta, chand, pandey, joshi, jaiswar, nanjappa, purushottam, yadav, sharma, pandey, joshi, joshi, lata, mehdi, misra, & singh]kumar2018
kumar, b., omar, a., maheswar, g., et al. 2018, title3.6-m devasthal optical telescope project: completion and first results, bulletin de la societe royale des sciences de liege, 87, 29
[s.-s. li et al.(2021)li, yang, yang, chen, songsheng, liu, du, luo, yu, hu, jiang, bao, guo, zhang, li, xiao, lu, ho, bai, bian, aceituno, minezaki, horne, kokubo, & wang]li2021
li, s.-s., yang, s., yang, z.-x., et al. 2021, titlereverberation mapping of two luminous quasars: the broad-line region structure and black hole mass, the astrophysical journal, 920, 9, 10.3847/1538-4357/ac116e
[s.-s. li et al.(2022)li, feng, liu, bai, li, lu, wang, huang, & zhang]li_2022
li, s.-s., feng, h.-c., liu, h. t., et al. 2022, titlevelocity-resolved reverberation mapping of changing-look active galactic nucleus ngc 4151 during outburst stage: evidence for kinematics evolution of broad-line region, the astrophysical journal, 936, 75, 10.3847/1538-4357/ac8745
[y.-r. li & j.-m. wang(2023)li & wang]liandwang2023
li, y.-r., & wang, j.-m. 2023, titlespectroastrometric reverberation mapping of broad-line regions, , 943, 36, 10.3847/1538-4357/aca66d
[y.-r. li et al.(2014)li, wang, hu, du, & bai]pycali2014
li, y.-r., wang, j.-m., hu, c., du, p., & bai, j.-m. 2014, titlea bayesian method for the intercalibration of spectra in reverberation mapping, , 786, l6, 10.1088/2041-8205/786/1/l6
[y.-r. li et al.(2018)li, songsheng, qiu, hu, du, lu, huang, bai, bian, yuan, ho, & wang]li2018
li, y.-r., songsheng, y.-y., qiu, j., et al. 2018, titlesupermassive black holes with high accretion rates in active galactic nuclei. viii. structure of the broad-line region and mass of the central black hole in mrk 142, , 869, 137, 10.3847/1538-4357/aaee6b
[y.-r. li et al.(2024)li, hu, yao, chen, bai, yang, du, fang, fu, liu, peng, songsheng, wang, xiao, zhai, winkler, bai, ho, petrov, aceituno, & wang]li2024
li, y.-r., hu, c., yao, z.-h., et al. 2024, titlespectroastrometry and reverberation mapping of active galactic nuclei. i. the h broad-line region structure and black hole masses of five quasars, , 974, 86, 10.3847/1538-4357/ad6906
[y.-r. li et al.(2025)li, shangguan, wang, davies, santos, eisenhauer, songsheng, winkler, aceituno, bai, bai, brotherton, cao, chen, du, fang, feng, feuchtgruber, förster schreiber, fu, genzel, gillessen, ho, hu, liu, lutz, ott, petrov, rabien, shimizu, sturm, tacconi, wang, yao, zhai, zhang, zhao, & zhao]li2025
li, y.-r., shangguan, j., wang, j.-m., et al. 2025, titlespectroastrometry and reverberation mapping of active galactic nuclei. ii. measuring geometric distances and black hole masses of four nearby quasars, arxiv e-prints, arxiv:2502.18856, 10.48550/arxiv.2502.18856
[u. malik et al.(2023)malik, sharp, penton, yu, martini, lidman, tucker, davis, lewis, aguena, allam, alves, andrade-oliveira, asorey, bacon, bertin, bocquet, brooks, burke, carnero rosell, carollo, carrasco kind, carretero, costanzi, da costa, pereira, de vicente, desai, diehl, doel, everett, ferrero, frieman, garcía-bellido, gerdes, gruen, gruendl, gschwend, hinton, hollowood, honscheid, james, kuehn, marshall, mena-fernández, menanteau, miquel, ogando, palmese, paz-chinchón, pieres, plazas malagón, raveri, rodriguez-monroy, romer, sanchez, scarpine, sevilla-noarbe, smith, soares-santos, suchyta, swanson, tarle, taylor, tucker, weaverdyck, & wilkinson]malik2023
malik, u., sharp, r., penton, a., et al. 2023, titleozdes reverberation mapping program: h lags from the 6-yr survey, , 520, 2009, 10.1093/mnras/stad145
[i. m. mchardy et al.(2006)mchardy, koerding, knigge, uttley, & fender]mchardy2006
mchardy, i. m., koerding, e., knigge, c., uttley, p., & fender, r. p. 2006, titleactive galactic nuclei as scaled-up galactic black holes, , 444, 730, 10.1038/nature05389
[r. f. mushotzky et al.(2011)mushotzky, edelson, baumgartner, & gandhi]mushotzky2011
mushotzky, r. f., edelson, r., baumgartner, w., & gandhi, p. 2011, titlekepler observations of rapid optical variability in active galactic nuclei, , 743, l12, 10.1088/2041-8205/743/1/l12
[ national optical astronomy observatories(1999)national optical astronomy observatories]iraf
national optical astronomy observatories. 1999, titleiraf: image reduction and analysis facility,, ascl soft, record ascl:9911.002 9911.002
[h. netzer(2013)netzer]netzer2013
netzer, h. 2013, the physics and evolution of active galactic nuclei (cambridge, uk: cambridge university press)
[a. omar et al.(2019)omar, kumar, krishna reddy, pant, & mahto]omar_first-light_2019
omar, a., kumar, t. s., krishna reddy, b., pant, j., & mahto, m. 2019, titlefirst-light images from low dispersion spectrograph-cum-imager on 3.6-meter devasthal optical telescope,, tech. rep., aries nainital india, 10.48550/arxiv.1902.05857
[d. e. osterbrock & g. j. ferland(2006)osterbrock & ferland]osterbrockferland2006
osterbrock, d. e., & ferland, g. j. 2006, astrophysics of gaseous nebulae and active galactic nuclei, 2nd edn. (sausalito, ca: university science books)
[d. panchal et al.(2023)panchal, kumar, omar, & misra]dimple2022
panchal, d., kumar, t. s., omar, a., & misra, k. 2023, titlecharacterization of a deep-depletion 4k × 4k charge-coupled device detector system designed for aries devasthal faint object spectrograph, journal of astronomical telescopes, instruments, and systems, 9, 018002, 10.1117/1.jatis.9.1.018002
[a. pancoast et al.(2014)pancoast, brewer, treu, park, barth, bentz, & woo]pancoast2014
pancoast, a., brewer, b. j., treu, t., et al. 2014, titlemodelling reverberation mapping data - ii. dynamical modelling of the lick agn monitoring project 2008 data set, , 445, 3073, 10.1093/mnras/stu1419
[s. pandey et al.(2022)pandey, rakshit, woo, & stalin]pandey_spectroscopic_2022
pandey, s., rakshit, s., woo, j.-h., & stalin, c. s. 2022, titlespectroscopic reverberation mapping of quasar pks 0736+017: broad-line region and black-hole mass, mnras, 516, 2671, 10.1093/mnras/stac2418
[s. park et al.(2017)park, woo, romero-colmenero, crawford, park, cho, jeon, choi, barth, pei, hickox, sung, & im]park_2017
park, s., woo, j.-h., romero-colmenero, e., et al. 2017, titlereverberation mapping of pg 0934+013 with the southern african large telescope, the astrophysical journal, 847, 125, 10.3847/1538-4357/aa88a3
[l. pei et al.(2017)pei, fausnaugh, barth, peterson, bentz, de rosa, denney, goad, kochanek, korista, kriss, pogge, bennert, brotherton, clubb, dalla bontà, filippenko, greene, grier, vestergaard, zheng, adams, beatty, bigley, brown, brown, canalizo, comerford, coker, corsini, croft, croxall, deason, eracleous, fox, gates, henderson, holmbeck, holoien, jensen, johnson, kelly, kim, king, lau, li, lochhaas, ma, manne-nicholas, mauerhan, malkan, mcgurk, morelli, mosquera, mudd, sanchez, nguyen, ochner, ou-yang, pancoast, penny, pizzella, poleski, runnoe, scott, schimoia, shappee, shivvers, simonian, siviero, somers, stevens, strauss, tayar, tejos, treu, van saders, vican, villanueva, yuk, zakamska, zhu, anderson, arévalo, bazhaw, bisogni, borman, bottorff, brandt, breeveld, cackett, carini, crenshaw, de lorenzo-cáceres, dietrich, edelson, efimova, ely, evans, ferland, flatland, gehrels, geier, gelbord, grupe, gupta, hall, hicks, horenstein, horne, hutchison, im, joner, jones,
  kaastra, kaspi, kelly, kennea, kim, kim, klimanov, lee, leonard, lira, macinnis, mathur, mchardy, montouri, musso, nazarov, netzer, norris, nousek, okhmat, papadakis, parks, pott, rafter, rix, saylor, schnülle, sergeev, siegel, skielboe, spencer, starkey, sung, teems, turner, uttley, villforth, weiss, woo, yan, young, & zu]pei2017
pei, l., fausnaugh, m. m., barth, a. j., et al. 2017, titlespace telescope and optical reverberation mapping project. v. optical spectroscopic campaign and emission-line analysis for ngc 5548, apj, 837, 131, 10.3847/1538-4357/aa5eb1
[b. m. peterson(1993)peterson]peterson_1993
peterson, b. m. 1993, titlereverberation mapping of active galactic nuclei, pasp, 105, 247, 10.1086/133140
[b. m. peterson et al.(1998)peterson, wanders, bertram, hunley, pogge, & wagner]peterson_1998
peterson, b. m., wanders, i., bertram, r., et al. 1998, titleoptical continuum and emission-line variability of seyfert 1 galaxies, apj, 501, 82, 10.1086/305813
[b. m. peterson et al.(2004)peterson, ferrarese, gilbert, kaspi, malkan, maoz, merritt, netzer, onken, pogge, vestergaard, & wandel]peterson_2004
peterson, b. m., ferrarese, l., gilbert, k. m., et al. 2004, titlecentral masses and broad-line region sizes of active galactic nuclei. ii. a homogeneous analysis of a large reverberation-mapping database, apj, 613, 682, 10.1086/423269
[s. rakshit(2020)rakshit]rakshit2020a   a
rakshit, s. 2020, titlebroad line region and black hole mass of pks 1510-089 from spectroscopic reverberation mapping, , 642, a59, 10.1051/0004-6361/202038324
[s. rakshit et al.(2015)rakshit, petrov, meilland, & hönig]rakshit2015
rakshit, s., petrov, r. g., meilland, a., & hönig, s. f. 2015, titledifferential interferometry of qso broad-line regions – i. improving the reverberation mapping model fits and black hole mass estimates, monthly notices of the royal astronomical society, 447, 2420, 10.1093/mnras/stu2613
[s. rakshit et al.(2020)rakshit, stalin, & kotilainen]rakshit2020apjs
rakshit, s., stalin, c. s., & kotilainen, j. 2020, titlespectral properties of quasars from sloan digital sky survey data release 14: the catalog, , 249, 17, 10.3847/1538-4365/ab99c5
[s. rakshit et al.(2019)rakshit, woo, gallo, hodges-kluck, shin, jeon, bae, baldassare, cho, cho, foord, kang, kang, karouzos, kim, kim, le, park, park, son, sung, bennert, & malkan]rakshit2019
rakshit, s., woo, j.-h., gallo, e., et al. 2019, titlethe seoul national university agn monitoring project. ii. blr size and black hole mass of two agns, the astrophysical journal, 886, 93, 10.3847/1538-4357/ab49fd
[m. j. rees(1984)rees]rees1984
rees, m. j. 1984, titleblack hole models for active galactic nuclei, , 22, 471, 10.1146/annurev.aa.22.090184.002351
[p. m. rodriguez‐pascual et al.(1997)rodriguez‐pascual, alloin, clavel, crenshaw, horne, kriss, krolik, malkan, netzer, o'brien, peterson, reichert, wamsteker, alexander, barr, blandford, bregman, carone, clements, courvoisier, de robertis, dietrich, dottori, edelson, filippenko, gaskell, huchra, hutchings, kollatschny, koratkar, korista, laor, macalpine, martin, maoz, mccollum, morris, perola, pogge, ptak, recondo‐gonzalez, rodriguez‐espinoza, rokaki, santos‐lleo, sekiguchi, shull, snijders, sparke, stirpe, stoner, sun, wagner, wanders, wilkes, winge, & zheng]rodriguezpascual1997
rodriguez‐pascual, p. m., alloin, d., clavel, j., et al. 1997, titlesteps toward determination of the size and structure of the broad-line region in active galactic nuclei. ix. ultraviolet observations of fairall 9, the astrophysical journal supplement series, volume 110, issue 1, pp. 9-20., 110, 9, 10.1086/312996
[d. j. schlegel et al.(1998)schlegel, finkbeiner, & davis]schlegel1998
schlegel, d. j., finkbeiner, d. p., & davis, m. 1998, titlemaps of dust infrared emission for use in estimation of reddening and cosmic microwave background radiation foregrounds, , 500, 525, 10.1086/305772
[s. g. sergeev et al.(2016)sergeev, nazarov, & borman]sergeev2017
sergeev, s. g., nazarov, s. v., & borman, g. a. 2016, titlespectral variability of the 3c 390.3 nucleus for more than 20 yr – i. variability of the broad and narrow emission line fluxes, monthly notices of the royal astronomical society, 465, 1898, 10.1093/mnras/stw2857
[s. sharma et al.(2022)sharma, ojha, ghosh, ninan, ghosh, ghosh, manoj, naik, d'costa, krishna reddy, nanjappa, pandey, sinha, panwar, antony, kaur, sahu, bangia, poojary, jadhav, bhagat, meshram, shah, rayner, toomey, sandimani, & pradeep r.]sharma2022
sharma, s., ojha, d. k., ghosh, a., et al. 2022, titletanspec: tifr-aries near-infrared spectrometer, , 134, 085002, 10.1088/1538-3873/ac81eb
[y. shen et al.(2011)shen, richards, strauss, hall, schneider, snedden, bizyaev, brewington, malanushenko, malanushenko, oravetz, pan, & simmons]shen_catalog_2011
shen, y., richards, g. t., strauss, m. a., et al. 2011, titlea catalog of quasar properties from sloan digital sky survey data release 7, a&as, 194, 45, 10.1088/0067-0049/194/2/45
[y. shen et al.(2019)shen, hall, horne, zhu, mcgreer, simm, trump, kinemuchi, brandt, green, grier, guo, ho, homayouni, jiang, i-hsiu li, morganson, petitjean, richards, schneider, starkey, wang, chambers, kaiser, kudritzki, magnier, & waters]shen_sloan_2019
shen, y., hall, p. b., horne, k., et al. 2019, titlethe sloan digital sky survey reverberation mapping project: sample characterization, a&as, 241, 34, 10.3847/1538-4365/ab074f
[y. shen et al.(2024)shen, grier, horne, stone, li, yang, homayouni, trump, anderson, brandt, hall, ho, jiang, petitjean, schneider, tao, donnan, alsayyad, bershady, blanton, bizyaev, bundy, chen, davis, dawson, fan, greene, gröller, guo, ibarra-medel, jiang, keenan, kollmeier, lejoly, li, de la macorra, moe, nie, rossi, smith, tee, weijmans, xu, yue, zhou, zhou, & zou]shen2024
shen, y., grier, c. j., horne, k., et al. 2024, titlethe sloan digital sky survey reverberation mapping project: key results, , 272, 26, 10.3847/1538-4365/ad3936
[c. sobrino figaredo et al.(2025)sobrino figaredo, chelouche, haas, ramolla, kaspi, panda, ochmann, zucker, chini, probst, kollatschny, & murphy]sobrino2025
sobrino figaredo, c., chelouche, d., haas, m., et al. 2025, titlebroad-line region characterization in dozens of active galactic nuclei using small-aperture telescopes, , 276, 48, 10.3847/1538-4365/ad9474
[d. tody(1986)tody]tody1986
tody, d. 1986, in society of photo-optical instrumentation engineers (spie) conference series, vol. 627, instrumentation in astronomy vi, ed. d. l. crawford, 733, 10.1117/12.968154
[d. tody(1993)tody]tody1993
tody, d. 1993, in astronomical society of the pacific conference series, vol. 52, astronomical data analysis software and systems ii, ed. r. j. hanisch, r. j. v. brissenden, & j. barnes, 173
[v. u et al.(2022)u, barth, vogler, guo, treu, bennert, canalizo, filippenko, gates, hamann, joner, malkan, pancoast, williams, woo, abolfathi, abramson, armen, bae, bohn, boizelle, bostroem, brandel, brink, channa, cooper, cosens, donohue, fillingham, gonzález-buitrago, halevi, halle, hood, horne, horst, de kouchkovsky, kuhn, kumar, leonard, loveland, manzano-king, mchardy, michel, olaes, park, park, pei, ross, runco, samuel, sánchez, scott, sexton, shin, shivvers, spencer, stahl, stegman, stomberg, valenti, villafaña, walsh, yuk, & zheng]u2022
u, v., barth, a. j., vogler, h. a., et al. 2022, titlethe lick agn monitoring project 2016: velocity-resolved h lags in luminous seyfert galaxies, , 925, 52, 10.3847/1538-4357/ac3d26
[e. van groningen & i. wanders(1992)van groningen & wanders]van_groningen1992
van groningen, e., & wanders, i. 1992, titlean algorithm for the relative scaling of spectra, , 104, 700, 10.1086/133039
[j.-m. wang et al.(2020)wang, songsheng, li, du, & zhang]wang2020
wang, j.-m., songsheng, y.-y., li, y.-r., du, p., & zhang, z.-x. 2020, titlea parallax distance to 3c 273 through spectroastrometry and reverberation mapping, nature astronomy, 4, 517, 10.1038/s41550-019-0979-5
[s. wang & j.-h. woo(2024)wang & woo]wang_2024
wang, s., & woo, j.-h. 2024, titlerevisiting the h size–luminosity relation using a uniform reverberation-mapping analysis, , 275, 13, 10.3847/1538-4365/ad74f2
[s. wang et al.(2019)wang, shen, jiang, horne, brandt, grier, ho, homayouni, i-hsiu li, schneider, & trump]wangandshen2019
wang, s., shen, y., jiang, l., et al. 2019, titlethe sloan digital sky survey reverberation mapping project: low-ionization broad-line widths and implications for virial black hole mass estimation, , 882, 4, 10.3847/1538-4357/ab322b
[s. wang et al.(2025)wang, woo, barth, bennert, gallo, hodges-kluck, kim, rakshit, treu, cho, kabasares, malkan, mandal, son, u, & villafana]wang_2025
wang, s., woo, j.-h., barth, a. j., et al. 2025, titleseoul national university agn monitoring project. v. velocity-resolved h reverberation mapping and evidence of kinematics evolution, , 983, 45, 10.3847/1538-4357/adbca5
[j.-h. woo & c. m. urry(2002)woo & urry]woo2002
woo, j.-h., & urry, c. m. 2002, titleactive galactic nucleus black hole masses and bolometric luminosities, , 579, 530, 10.1086/342878
[j. h. woo et al.(2015)woo, yoon, park, park, & kim]woo2015
woo, j. h., yoon, y., park, s., park, d., & kim, s. c. 2015, titlethe black hole mass-stellar velocity dispersion relation of narrow-line seyfert 1 galaxies, apj, 801, 1, 10.1088/0004-637x/801/1/38
[j.-h. woo et al.(2024)woo, wang, rakshit, cho, son, bennert, gallo, hodges-kluck, treu, barth, cho, foord, geum, guo, jadhav, jeon, kabasares, kang, kim, kim, kim, le, malkan, mandal, park, spencer, shin, sung, u, williams, & yee]woo2024
woo, j.-h., wang, s., rakshit, s., et al. 2024, titlethe seoul national university agn monitoring project. iii. h lag measurements of 32 luminous active galactic nuclei and the high-luminosity end of the size–luminosity relation, , 962, 67, 10.3847/1538-4357/ad132f
[z. yu et al.(2020)yu, kochanek, peterson, zu, brandt, cackett, fausnaugh, & mchardy]yu2020
yu, z., kochanek, c. s., peterson, b. m., et al. 2020, titleon reverberation mapping lag uncertainties, , 491, 6045, 10.1093/mnras/stz3464
[t. e. zastrocky et al.(2024)zastrocky, brotherton, du, mclane, olson, dale, kobulnicky, maithil, nguyen, chick, kasper, hand, adelman, carter, murphree, oeur, roth, schonsberg, caradonna, favro, ferguson, gonzalez, hadding, hagler, rogers, stack, chapman, bao, fang, zhai, yang, chen, bai, fu, liu, yao, peng, songsheng, li, bai, hu, xiao, ho, & wang]maha2024
zastrocky, t. e., brotherton, m. s., du, p., et al. 2024, titlemonitoring agns with h asymmetry. iv. first reverberation mapping results of 14 active galactic nuclei, , 272, 29, 10.3847/1538-4365/ad3bad
[z.-x. zhang et al.(2019)zhang, du, smith, et al.]zhang2019
zhang, z.-x., du, p., smith, p. s., et al. 2019, titlekinematics of the broad-line region of 3c 273 from a 10 yr reverberation mapping campaign, , 876, 49, 10.3847/1538-4357/ab1099
[y. zu et al.(2013)zu, kochanek, kozłowski, et al.]zu2013
zu, y., kochanek, c. s., kozłowski, s., et al. 2013, titleis quasar optical variability a damped random walk?, , 765, 106, 10.1088/0004-637x/765/2/106
[y. zu et al.(2011)zu, kochanek, & peterson]zu2011
zu, y., kochanek, c. s., & peterson, b. m. 2011, titlean alternative approach to measuring reverberation lags in active galactic nuclei, , 735, 80, 10.1088/0004-637x/735/2/80
/edocument/
